uri-get-off-my-lawn/draft.md, before:

---
title: Standardising Structure in URIs
abbrev: URI Structure Policies
docname: draft-nottingham-uri-get-off-my-lawn-01
date: 2013
category: bcp
updates: 3986

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: URI structure

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC4395:
  RFC5785:
  RFC6838:

informative:
  RFC5988:
  RFC6570:
  webarch:
    target: http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-webarch-20041215
    title: Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One
    author:
     -
        ins: I. Jacobs
        name: Ian Jacobs
        org: 
     -
        ins: N. Walsh
        name: Norman Walsh
        org:
    date: 2004-12-15
  HTML4:
    target: http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/
    title: HTML 4.01 Specification
    author:
     -
       ins: I. Jacobs
       name: Ian Jacobs
       org: W3C
     -
       ins: A. Le Hors
       name: Arnaud Le Hors
       org: W3C
     - 
       ins: D. Raggett
       name: Dave Raggett
       org:
    date: 1999-12-24


--- abstract

It is sometimes attractive to specify a particular structure for URIs (or parts thereof) to add
support for a new feature, application or facility. This document provides guidelines for such
situations in standards documents.


--- middle

Introduction
============

URIs {{RFC3986}} very often include structure and application data. This might include artefacts
from filesystems (often occuring in the path component), user information (often in the query
component) and application data throughout. In some cases, there can even be application-specific
data in the authority component (e.g., some applications are spread across several hostnames to
enable a form of partitioning or dispatch).

Such conventions for the structure of URIs can be imposed by an implementation; for example, many
Web servers use the filename extension of the last path segment to determine the media type of the
response. Likewise, pre-packaged applications often have highly structured URIs that can only be
changed in limited ways (often, just the hostname and port they are deployed upon).

Because the owner of the URI is choosing to use the server or the software, this can be seen as
reasonable delegation of authority. When such conventions are mandated by standards, however, it
can have several potentially detrimental effects:

* Collisions - As more conventions for URI structure become standardised, it becomes more likely
  that there will be collisions between such conventions (especially considering that servers,
  applications and individual deployments will have their own conventions).

* Dilution - Adorning URIs with extra information to support new standard features dilutes their
  usefulness as identifiers when that information is ephemeral (as URIs ought to be stable; see
  {{webarch}} Section 3.5.1), or its inclusion causes several alternate forms of the URI to exist
  (see {{webarch}} Section 2.3.1).

* Operational Difficulty - Supporting some URI conventions can be difficult in some
  implementations. For example, specifying that a particular query parameter be used preclude the
  use of Web servers that serve the response from a filesystem. Likewise, an application that fixes
  a base path for its operation (e.g., "/v1") makes it impossible to deploy other applications on
  the same host.

* Client Assumptions - When conventions are standardised, some clients will inevitably assume that
  the standards are in use when they are seen. This can lead to interoperability problems.

While it is not ideal when a server or a deployed application mandates uri structure (indeed, this
is not recommended practice, but that discussion is out of scope for this document), recommending
standards that mandate URI structure is inappropriate because the structure of a URI needs to be
firmly under the control of its owner, and the IETF (as well as other organisations) should not
usurp this ownership; see {{webarch}} Section 2.2.2.1 for more information.

This document explains best current practices for establishing URI structures, conventions and
formats in specifications; in particular, IETF specifications, although they are more broadly
applicable. It also offers strategies for specifications to avoid violating these guidelines in
{{alternatives}}.


Who This Document Is For
------------------------

These guidelines are IETF Best Current Practice, and are therefore binding upon IETF
standards-track documents, as well as submissions to the RFC Editor on the Independent Submissions
track. See {{RFC2026}} for more information. 

They are also binding on other Open Standards organisations (in the sense of {{RFC2026}}) that
choose to adopt them. Questions as to their applicability ought to be handled through the liaison
relationship, if present.

In particular, these guidelines target a few different types of specifications:

* URI Scheme Definitions ("scheme definitions") - specifications that define and register URI
  schemes, as per {{RFC4395}}.

* Protocol Extensions ("extensions") - specifications that offer new capabilities to potentially
  any identifier, or a large subset; e.g., a new signature mechanism for HTTP URIs, or metadata for
  any URI.

* Applications Using URIs ("applications") - specifications that use URIs to meet specific needs;
  e.g., a HTTP interface to particular information on a host.

Requirements that target the generic class "Specifications" apply to all standards, including both
those enumerated above above and others. They are also applicable to non-standard RFC publications.

Note that this specification ought not be interpreted as preventing the allocation of control of
URIs by parties that legitimately own them, or have delegated that ownership; for example, a
specification might legitimately specify the semantics of a URI on the IANA.ORG Web site as part of
the establishment of a registry.


Notational Conventions
----------------------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.


Best Current Practices for Standarising Structured URIs
=======================================================

Different components of a URI have differing practices recommended.

URI Schemes
-----------

Applications and extensions MAY require use of specific URI scheme(s); for example, it is perfectly
acceptable to require that an application support HTTP and HTTPS URIs. However, applications SHOULD
NOT preclude the use of other URI schemes in the future, to promote reuse, unless they are clearly
specific to the nominated schemes.

Specifications MUST NOT define substructure within URI schemes, unless they do so by modifying
{{RFC4395}}, or they are the registration document for the URI scheme(s) in question.


URI Authorities
---------------

Scheme definitions define the presence, format and semantics of an authority component in URIs; all
other specifications MUST NOT constrain, define structure or semantics for them.


URI Paths
---------

Scheme definitions define the presence, format, and semantics of a path component in URIs; all
other specifications MUST NOT constrain, define structure or semantics for them.

The only exception to this requirement is registered "well-known" URIs, as specified by {{RFC5785}}.


URI Queries
-----------

The presence, format and semantics of the query component of URIs is dependent upon many factors,
and MAY be constrained by a scheme definition. Often, they are determined by the implementation of
a resource itself.

Applications SHOULD NOT directly specify the syntax of queries, as this can cause operational
difficulties for deployments that do not support a particular form of a query.

Extensions MUST NOT specify the format or semantics of queries. In particular, extensions MUST NOT
assume that all HTTP(S) resources are capable of accepting queries in the format defined by
{{HTML4}}, Section 17.13.4.


URI Fragment Identifiers
------------------------

Media type definitions (as per {{RFC6838}} SHOULD specify the fragment identifier syntax(es) to be
used with them; other specifications MUST NOT define structure within the fragment identifier,
unless they are explicitly defining one for reuse by media type definitions.


Alternatives to Specifying Static URIs {#alternatives}
======================================

Given the issues above, the most successful strategy for applications and extensions that wish to
use URIs is to use them in the fashion they were designed; as run-time artefacts that are exchanged
as part of the protocol, rather than staticly specified syntax.

For example, if a specific URI needs to be known to interact with an application, its "shape" can
be determined by interacting with the application's more general interface (in Web terms, its "home
page") to learn about that URI.

{{RFC5988}} describes a framework for identifying the semantics of a link in a "link relation type"
to aid this. {{RFC6570}} provides a standard syntax for "link templates" that can be used to
dynamically insert application-specific variables into a URI to enable such applications while
avoiding impinging upon URI owners' control of them.

{{RFC5785}} allows specific paths to be 'reserved' for standard use on URI schemes that opt into
that mechanism (HTTP and HTTPS by default). Note, however, that this is not a general "escape
valve" for applications that need structured URIs; see that specification for more information.


Security Considerations
=======================

This document does not introduce new protocol artefacts with security considerations. 

--- back

Commit message:

modify abstract to include "squatting"

uri-get-off-my-lawn/draft.md, after:

---
title: Standardising Structure in URIs
abbrev: URI Structure Policies
docname: draft-nottingham-uri-get-off-my-lawn-01
date: 2013
category: bcp
updates: 3986

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: URI structure

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC4395:
  RFC5785:
  RFC6838:

informative:
  RFC5988:
  RFC6570:
  webarch:
    target: http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-webarch-20041215
    title: Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One
    author:
     -
        ins: I. Jacobs
        name: Ian Jacobs
        org: 
     -
        ins: N. Walsh
        name: Norman Walsh
        org:
    date: 2004-12-15
  HTML4:
    target: http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-html40/
    title: HTML 4.01 Specification
    author:
     -
       ins: I. Jacobs
       name: Ian Jacobs
       org: W3C
     -
       ins: A. Le Hors
       name: Arnaud Le Hors
       org: W3C
     - 
       ins: D. Raggett
       name: Dave Raggett
       org:
    date: 1999-12-24


--- abstract

It is sometimes attractive to specify a particular structure for URIs (or parts thereof) to add
support for a new feature, application or facility. This document provides guidelines to avoid the usurpation of the URI owner's rights in standards (sometimes called "URI Squatting").


--- middle

Introduction
============

URIs {{RFC3986}} very often include structure and application data. This might include artefacts
from filesystems (often occuring in the path component), user information (often in the query
component) and application data throughout. In some cases, there can even be application-specific
data in the authority component (e.g., some applications are spread across several hostnames to
enable a form of partitioning or dispatch).

Such conventions for the structure of URIs can be imposed by an implementation; for example, many
Web servers use the filename extension of the last path segment to determine the media type of the
response. Likewise, pre-packaged applications often have highly structured URIs that can only be
changed in limited ways (often, just the hostname and port they are deployed upon).

Because the owner of the URI is choosing to use the server or the software, this can be seen as
reasonable delegation of authority. When such conventions are mandated by standards, however, it
can have several potentially detrimental effects:

* Collisions - As more conventions for URI structure become standardised, it becomes more likely
  that there will be collisions between such conventions (especially considering that servers,
  applications and individual deployments will have their own conventions).

* Dilution - Adorning URIs with extra information to support new standard features dilutes their
  usefulness as identifiers when that information is ephemeral (as URIs ought to be stable; see
  {{webarch}} Section 3.5.1), or its inclusion causes several alternate forms of the URI to exist
  (see {{webarch}} Section 2.3.1).

* Operational Difficulty - Supporting some URI conventions can be difficult in some
  implementations. For example, specifying that a particular query parameter be used preclude the
  use of Web servers that serve the response from a filesystem. Likewise, an application that fixes
  a base path for its operation (e.g., "/v1") makes it impossible to deploy other applications on
  the same host.

* Client Assumptions - When conventions are standardised, some clients will inevitably assume that
  the standards are in use when they are seen. This can lead to interoperability problems.

While it is not ideal when a server or a deployed application mandates uri structure (indeed, this
is not recommended practice, but that discussion is out of scope for this document), recommending
standards that mandate URI structure is inappropriate because the structure of a URI needs to be
firmly under the control of its owner, and the IETF (as well as other organisations) should not
usurp this ownership; see {{webarch}} Section 2.2.2.1 for more information.

This document explains best current practices for establishing URI structures, conventions and
formats in specifications; in particular, IETF specifications, although they are more broadly
applicable. It also offers strategies for specifications to avoid violating these guidelines in
{{alternatives}}.


Who This Document Is For
------------------------

These guidelines are IETF Best Current Practice, and are therefore binding upon IETF
standards-track documents, as well as submissions to the RFC Editor on the Independent Submissions
track. See {{RFC2026}} for more information. 

They are also binding on other Open Standards organisations (in the sense of {{RFC2026}}) that
choose to adopt them. Questions as to their applicability ought to be handled through the liaison
relationship, if present.

In particular, these guidelines target a few different types of specifications:

* URI Scheme Definitions ("scheme definitions") - specifications that define and register URI
  schemes, as per {{RFC4395}}.

* Protocol Extensions ("extensions") - specifications that offer new capabilities to potentially
  any identifier, or a large subset; e.g., a new signature mechanism for HTTP URIs, or metadata for
  any URI.

* Applications Using URIs ("applications") - specifications that use URIs to meet specific needs;
  e.g., a HTTP interface to particular information on a host.

Requirements that target the generic class "Specifications" apply to all standards, including both
those enumerated above above and others. They are also applicable to non-standard RFC publications.

Note that this specification ought not be interpreted as preventing the allocation of control of
URIs by parties that legitimately own them, or have delegated that ownership; for example, a
specification might legitimately specify the semantics of a URI on the IANA.ORG Web site as part of
the establishment of a registry.


Notational Conventions
----------------------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.


Best Current Practices for Standarising Structured URIs
=======================================================

Different components of a URI have differing practices recommended.

URI Schemes
-----------

Applications and extensions MAY require use of specific URI scheme(s); for example, it is perfectly
acceptable to require that an application support HTTP and HTTPS URIs. However, applications SHOULD
NOT preclude the use of other URI schemes in the future, to promote reuse, unless they are clearly
specific to the nominated schemes.

Specifications MUST NOT define substructure within URI schemes, unless they do so by modifying
{{RFC4395}}, or they are the registration document for the URI scheme(s) in question.


URI Authorities
---------------

Scheme definitions define the presence, format and semantics of an authority component in URIs; all
other specifications MUST NOT constrain, define structure or semantics for them.


URI Paths
---------

Scheme definitions define the presence, format, and semantics of a path component in URIs; all
other specifications MUST NOT constrain, define structure or semantics for them.

The only exception to this requirement is registered "well-known" URIs, as specified by {{RFC5785}}.


URI Queries
-----------

The presence, format and semantics of the query component of URIs is dependent upon many factors,
and MAY be constrained by a scheme definition. Often, they are determined by the implementation of
a resource itself.

Applications SHOULD NOT directly specify the syntax of queries, as this can cause operational
difficulties for deployments that do not support a particular form of a query.

Extensions MUST NOT specify the format or semantics of queries. In particular, extensions MUST NOT
assume that all HTTP(S) resources are capable of accepting queries in the format defined by
{{HTML4}}, Section 17.13.4.


URI Fragment Identifiers
------------------------

Media type definitions (as per {{RFC6838}} SHOULD specify the fragment identifier syntax(es) to be
used with them; other specifications MUST NOT define structure within the fragment identifier,
unless they are explicitly defining one for reuse by media type definitions.


Alternatives to Specifying Static URIs {#alternatives}
======================================

Given the issues above, the most successful strategy for applications and extensions that wish to
use URIs is to use them in the fashion they were designed; as run-time artefacts that are exchanged
as part of the protocol, rather than staticly specified syntax.

For example, if a specific URI needs to be known to interact with an application, its "shape" can
be determined by interacting with the application's more general interface (in Web terms, its "home
page") to learn about that URI.

{{RFC5988}} describes a framework for identifying the semantics of a link in a "link relation type"
to aid this. {{RFC6570}} provides a standard syntax for "link templates" that can be used to
dynamically insert application-specific variables into a URI to enable such applications while
avoiding impinging upon URI owners' control of them.

{{RFC5785}} allows specific paths to be 'reserved' for standard use on URI schemes that opt into
that mechanism (HTTP and HTTPS by default). Note, however, that this is not a general "escape
valve" for applications that need structured URIs; see that specification for more information.


Security Considerations
=======================

This document does not introduce new protocol artefacts with security considerations. 

--- back
