httpbis-alt-svc/draft.md, before:

---
title: HTTP Alternative Services
abbrev: Alternative Services
docname: draft-nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc-04
date: 2014
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: Akamai
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/ 
 -
    ins: P. McManus
    name: Patrick McManus
    organization: Mozilla
    email: mcmanus@ducksong.com
    uri: https://mozillians.org/u/pmcmanus/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC5234:
  RFC6066:
  RFC6454:
  I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache:

informative:
  RFC3864:
  RFC5246:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
    

--- abstract

This document specifies "alternative services" for HTTP, which allow an origin's
resources to be available at a separate network location, possibly accessed
with a different protocol configuration.

--- middle

# Introduction

TBD

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.

This document uses the Augmented BNF defined in {{RFC5234}} along with the
"OWS", "DIGIT", "parameter", "uri-host", "port" and "delta-second" rules from
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}}, and uses the "#rule" extension defined in
Section 7 of that document.


# Alternative Services {#alternative}

This specification defines a new concept in HTTP, the "alternative service."
When an origin (see {{RFC6454}}) has resources are accessible through a
different protocol / host / port combination, it is said to have an alternative
service.

An alternative service can be used to interact with the resources on an origin
server at a separate location on the network, possibly using a different
protocol configuration.

For example, an origin:

    ("http", "www.example.com", "80")
	
might declare that its resources are also accessible at the alternative service:

    ("h2", "new.example.com", "81")

By their nature, alternative services are explicitly at the granularity of an
origin; i.e., they cannot be selectively applied to resources within an origin.

Alternative services do not replace or change the origin for any given resource;
in general, they are not visible to the software "above" the access mechanism.
The alternative service is essentially alternative routing information that can
also be used to reach the origin in the same way that DNS CNAME or SRV records
define routing information at the name resolution level. Each origin maps to a
set of these routes - the default route is derived from origin itself and the
other routes are introduced based on alternative-protocol information.

Furthermore, it is important to note that the first member of an alternative
service tuple is different from the "scheme" component of an origin; it is more
specific, identifying not only the major version of the protocol being used,
but potentially communication options for that protocol.

This means that clients using an alternative service will change the host, port
and protocol that they are using to fetch resources, but these changes MUST NOT
be propagated to the application that is using HTTP; from that standpoint, the
URI being accessed and all information derived from it (scheme, host, port) are
the same as before.

Importantly, this includes its security context; in particular, when TLS
{{RFC5246}} is in use, the alternative server will need to present a certificate
for the origin's host name, not that of the alternative. Likewise, the Host
header is still derived from the origin, not the alternative service (just as it
would if a CNAME were being used).

The changes MAY, however, be made visible in debugging tools, consoles, etc.

Formally, an alternative service is identified by the combination of:

* An ALPN protocol, as per {{I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg}}
* A host, as per {{RFC3986}}
* A port, as per {{RFC3986}}

Additionally, each alternative service MUST have:

* A freshness lifetime, expressed in seconds; see {{caching}}

There are many ways that a client could discover the alternative service(s)
associated with an origin.


## Host Authentication {#host_auth}

Clients MUST NOT use alternative services with a host other than the origin's
without strong server authentication; this mitigates the attack described in
{{host_security}}. One way to achieve this is for the alternative to use TLS
with a certificate that is valid for that origin.

For example, if the origin's host is "www.example.com" and an alternative is
offered on "other.example.com" with the "h2" protocol, and the certificate
offered is valid for "www.example.com", the client can use the alternative.
However, if "other.example.com" is offered with the "h2c" protocol, the client
cannot use it, because there is no mechanism in that protocol to establish
strong server authentication.

Furthermore, this means that the HTTP Host header and the SNI information
provided in TLS by the client will be that of the origin, not the alternative.


## Alternative Service Caching {#caching}

Mechanisms for discovering alternative services can associate a freshness
lifetime with them; for example, the Alt-Svc header field uses the "ma"
parameter.

Clients MAY choose to use an alternative service instead of the origin at any
time when it is considered fresh; see {{switching}} for specific
recommendations. 

Clients with existing connections to alternative services are not required to
fall back to the origin when its freshness lifetime ends; i.e., the caching
mechanism is intended for limiting how long an alternative service can be used
for establishing new requests, not limiting the use of existing ones.

To mitigate risks associated with caching compromised values (see
{{host_security}} for details), user agents SHOULD examine cached alternative
services when they detect a change in network configuration, and remove any
that could be compromised (for example, those whose association with the trust
root is questionable). UAs that do not have a means of detecting network
changes SHOULD place an upper bound on their lifetime.


## Requiring Server Name Indication

A client must only use a TLS-based alternative service if the client also
supports TLS Server Name Indication (SNI) {{RFC6066}}. This supports the
conservation of IP addresses on the alternative service host.


## Using Alternative Services {#switching}

By their nature, alternative services are optional; clients are not required to
use them. However, it is advantageous for clients to behave in a predictable
way when they are used by servers (e.g., for load balancing).

Therefore, if a client becomes aware of an alternative service, the client
SHOULD use that alternative service for all requests to the associated origin
as soon as it is available, provided that the security properties of the
alternative service protocol are desirable, as compared to the existing
connection.

The client is not required to block requests; the origin's connection can be
used until the alternative connection is established. However, if the security
properties of the existing connection are weak (e.g. cleartext HTTP/1.1) then
it might make sense to block until the new connection is fully available in
order to avoid information leakage.

Furthermore, if the connection to the alternative service fails or is
unresponsive, the client MAY fall back to using the origin. Note, however, that
this could be the basis of a downgrade attack, thus losing any enhanced
security properties of the alternative service.


# The Alt-Svc HTTP Header Field {#alt-svc}

A HTTP(S) origin server can advertise the availability of alternative services
(see {{alternative}}) to clients by adding an Alt-Svc header field to responses.

    Alt-Svc     = 1#( alternative *( OWS ";" OWS parameter ) )
    alternative   = <"> protocol-id <"> "=" port
    protocol-id = <ALPN protocol identifier>

For example:

    Alt-Svc: "http2"=8000

This indicates that the "http2" protocol on the same host using the
indicated port (in this case, 8000).

Alt-Svc does not allow advertisement of alternative services on other hosts, to
protect against various header-based attacks.

It can, however, have multiple values:

    Alt-Svc: "h2c"=8000, "h2"=443

The value(s) advertised by Alt-Svc can be used by clients to open a new
connection to one or more alternative services immediately, or simultaneously
with subsequent requests on the same connection.

Intermediaries MUST NOT change or append Alt-Svc values.

Finally, note that while it may be technically possible to put content other
than printable ASCII in a HTTP header, some implementations only support ASCII
(or a superset of it) in header field values. Therefore, this field SHOULD NOT
be used to convey protocol identifiers that are not printable ASCII, or those
that contain quote characters.


## Caching Alt-Svc Header Field Values

When an alternative service is advertised using Alt-Svc, it is considered fresh
for 24 hours from generation of the message. This can be modified with the 'ma'
(max-age) parameter;

    Alt-Svc: "h2"=443;ma=3600
    
which indicates the number of seconds since the response was generated the
alternative service is considered fresh for. 

    ma = delta-seconds

See {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache}} Section 4.2.3 for details of determining
response age. For example, a response:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/html
    Cache-Control: 600
    Age: 30
    Alt-Svc: "h2c"=8000; ma=60

indicates that an alternative service is available and usable for the next 60
seconds. However, the response has already been cached for 30 seconds (as per
the Age header field value), so therefore the alternative service is only fresh
for the 30 seconds from when this response was received, minus estimated
transit time. 

When an Alt-Svc response header is received from an origin, its value
invalidates and replaces all cached alternative services for that origin.
   
See {{caching}} for general requirements on caching alternative services.

Note that the freshness lifetime for HTTP caching (here, 600 seconds) does not
affect caching of Alt-Svc values.


# IANA Considerations

## The Alt-Svc Message Header Field

This document registers Alt-Svc in the Permanent Message Header Registry
{{RFC3864}}.

* Header Field Name: Alt-Svc
* Application Protocol: http
* Status: standard
* Author/Change Controller: IETF
* Specification Document: [this document]
* Related Information: 

  
# Security Considerations

Identified security considerations should be enumerated in the appropriate
documents depending on which proposals are accepted. Those listed below are
generic to all uses of alternative services; more specific ones might be
necessary.

## Changing Ports

Using an alternative service implies accessing an origin's resources on an
alternative port, at a minimum. An attacker that can inject alternative services
and listen at the advertised port is therefore able to hijack an origin.

For example, an attacker that can add HTTP response header fields can redirect
traffic to a different port on the same host using the Alt-Svc header field; if
that port is under the attacker's control, they can thus masquerade as the HTTP
server.

This risk can be mitigated by restricting the ability to advertise alternative
services, and restricting who can open a port for listening on that host.

## Changing Hosts {#host_security}

When the host is changed due to the use of an alternative service, it presents
an opportunity for attackers to hijack communication to an origin.

For example, if an attacker can convince a user agent to send all traffic for
"innocent.example.org" to "evil.example.com" by successfully associating it as
an alternative service, they can masquerade as that origin. This can be done
locally (see mitigations above) or remotely (e.g., by an intermediary as a
man-in-the-middle attack).

This is the reason for the requirement in {{host_auth}} that any alternative
service with a host different to the origin's be strongly authenticated with
the origin's identity; i.e., presenting a certificate for the origin proves
that the alternative service is authorized to serve traffic for the origin.

However, this authorization is only as strong as the method used to
authenticate the alternative service. In particular, there are well-known
exploits to make an attacker's certificate appear as legitimate.

Alternative services could be used to persist such an attack; for example, an
intermediary could man-in-the-middle TLS-protected communication to a target,
and then direct all traffic to an alternative service with a large freshness
lifetime, so that the user agent still directs traffic to the attacker even when
not using the intermediary.

As a result, there is a requirement in {{caching}} to examine cached alternative
services when a network change is detected.

## Changing Protocols

When the ALPN protocol is changed due to the use of an alternative service, the
security properties of the new connection to the origin can be different from
that of the "normal" connection to the origin, because the protocol identifier
itself implies this.

For example, if a "https://" URI had a protocol advertised that does not use
some form of end-to-end encryption (most likely, TLS), it violates the
expectations for security that the URI scheme implies.

Therefore, clients cannot blindly use alternative services, but instead evaluate
the option(s) presented to assure that security requirements and expectations
(of specifications, implementations and end users) are met.



--- back


# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Eliot Lear, Stephen Farrell, Guy Podjarny, Stephen Ludin, Erik
Nygren, Paul Hoffman, Adam Langley, Will Chan and Richard Barnes for their
feedback and suggestions.

The Alt-Svc header field was influenced by the design of the
Alternative-Protocol header in SPDY.



# For HTTP/2: NOT_AUTHORITATIVE (13)  {#error}

The endpoint refuses the stream prior to performing any application processing.
This server is not configured to provide a definitive response for the
requested resource. Clients receiving this error code SHOULD remove the
endpoint from their cache of alternative services, if present.

Commit message:

add 4NN Not Authoritative status code

httpbis-alt-svc/draft.md, after:

---
title: HTTP Alternative Services
abbrev: Alternative Services
docname: draft-nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc-04
date: 2014
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: Akamai
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/ 
 -
    ins: P. McManus
    name: Patrick McManus
    organization: Mozilla
    email: mcmanus@ducksong.com
    uri: https://mozillians.org/u/pmcmanus/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC5234:
  RFC6066:
  RFC6454:
  I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache:

informative:
  RFC3864:
  RFC5246:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p2-semantics:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
    

--- abstract

This document specifies "alternative services" for HTTP, which allow an origin's
resources to be available at a separate network location, possibly accessed
with a different protocol configuration.

--- middle

# Introduction

TBD

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.

This document uses the Augmented BNF defined in {{RFC5234}} along with the
"OWS", "DIGIT", "parameter", "uri-host", "port" and "delta-second" rules from
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}}, and uses the "#rule" extension defined in
Section 7 of that document.


# Alternative Services {#alternative}

This specification defines a new concept in HTTP, the "alternative service."
When an origin (see {{RFC6454}}) has resources are accessible through a
different protocol / host / port combination, it is said to have an alternative
service.

An alternative service can be used to interact with the resources on an origin
server at a separate location on the network, possibly using a different
protocol configuration.

For example, an origin:

    ("http", "www.example.com", "80")
	
might declare that its resources are also accessible at the alternative service:

    ("h2", "new.example.com", "81")

By their nature, alternative services are explicitly at the granularity of an
origin; i.e., they cannot be selectively applied to resources within an origin.

Alternative services do not replace or change the origin for any given resource;
in general, they are not visible to the software "above" the access mechanism.
The alternative service is essentially alternative routing information that can
also be used to reach the origin in the same way that DNS CNAME or SRV records
define routing information at the name resolution level. Each origin maps to a
set of these routes - the default route is derived from origin itself and the
other routes are introduced based on alternative-protocol information.

Furthermore, it is important to note that the first member of an alternative
service tuple is different from the "scheme" component of an origin; it is more
specific, identifying not only the major version of the protocol being used,
but potentially communication options for that protocol.

This means that clients using an alternative service will change the host, port
and protocol that they are using to fetch resources, but these changes MUST NOT
be propagated to the application that is using HTTP; from that standpoint, the
URI being accessed and all information derived from it (scheme, host, port) are
the same as before.

Importantly, this includes its security context; in particular, when TLS
{{RFC5246}} is in use, the alternative server will need to present a certificate
for the origin's host name, not that of the alternative. Likewise, the Host
header is still derived from the origin, not the alternative service (just as it
would if a CNAME were being used).

The changes MAY, however, be made visible in debugging tools, consoles, etc.

Formally, an alternative service is identified by the combination of:

* An ALPN protocol, as per {{I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg}}
* A host, as per {{RFC3986}}
* A port, as per {{RFC3986}}

Additionally, each alternative service MUST have:

* A freshness lifetime, expressed in seconds; see {{caching}}

There are many ways that a client could discover the alternative service(s)
associated with an origin.


## Host Authentication {#host_auth}

Clients MUST NOT use alternative services with a host other than the origin's
without strong server authentication; this mitigates the attack described in
{{host_security}}. One way to achieve this is for the alternative to use TLS
with a certificate that is valid for that origin.

For example, if the origin's host is "www.example.com" and an alternative is
offered on "other.example.com" with the "h2" protocol, and the certificate
offered is valid for "www.example.com", the client can use the alternative.
However, if "other.example.com" is offered with the "h2c" protocol, the client
cannot use it, because there is no mechanism in that protocol to establish
strong server authentication.

Furthermore, this means that the HTTP Host header and the SNI information
provided in TLS by the client will be that of the origin, not the alternative.


## Alternative Service Caching {#caching}

Mechanisms for discovering alternative services can associate a freshness
lifetime with them; for example, the Alt-Svc header field uses the "ma"
parameter.

Clients MAY choose to use an alternative service instead of the origin at any
time when it is considered fresh; see {{switching}} for specific
recommendations. 

Clients with existing connections to alternative services are not required to
fall back to the origin when its freshness lifetime ends; i.e., the caching
mechanism is intended for limiting how long an alternative service can be used
for establishing new requests, not limiting the use of existing ones.

To mitigate risks associated with caching compromised values (see
{{host_security}} for details), user agents SHOULD examine cached alternative
services when they detect a change in network configuration, and remove any
that could be compromised (for example, those whose association with the trust
root is questionable). UAs that do not have a means of detecting network
changes SHOULD place an upper bound on their lifetime.


## Requiring Server Name Indication

A client must only use a TLS-based alternative service if the client also
supports TLS Server Name Indication (SNI) {{RFC6066}}. This supports the
conservation of IP addresses on the alternative service host.


## Using Alternative Services {#switching}

By their nature, alternative services are optional; clients are not required to
use them. However, it is advantageous for clients to behave in a predictable
way when they are used by servers (e.g., for load balancing).

Therefore, if a client becomes aware of an alternative service, the client
SHOULD use that alternative service for all requests to the associated origin
as soon as it is available, provided that the security properties of the
alternative service protocol are desirable, as compared to the existing
connection.

The client is not required to block requests; the origin's connection can be
used until the alternative connection is established. However, if the security
properties of the existing connection are weak (e.g. cleartext HTTP/1.1) then
it might make sense to block until the new connection is fully available in
order to avoid information leakage.

Furthermore, if the connection to the alternative service fails or is
unresponsive, the client MAY fall back to using the origin. Note, however, that
this could be the basis of a downgrade attack, thus losing any enhanced
security properties of the alternative service.


# The Alt-Svc HTTP Header Field {#alt-svc}

A HTTP(S) origin server can advertise the availability of alternative services
(see {{alternative}}) to clients by adding an Alt-Svc header field to responses.

    Alt-Svc     = 1#( alternative *( OWS ";" OWS parameter ) )
    alternative   = <"> protocol-id <"> "=" port
    protocol-id = <ALPN protocol identifier>

For example:

    Alt-Svc: "http2"=8000

This indicates that the "http2" protocol on the same host using the
indicated port (in this case, 8000).

Alt-Svc does not allow advertisement of alternative services on other hosts, to
protect against various header-based attacks.

It can, however, have multiple values:

    Alt-Svc: "h2c"=8000, "h2"=443

The value(s) advertised by Alt-Svc can be used by clients to open a new
connection to one or more alternative services immediately, or simultaneously
with subsequent requests on the same connection.

Intermediaries MUST NOT change or append Alt-Svc values.

Finally, note that while it may be technically possible to put content other
than printable ASCII in a HTTP header, some implementations only support ASCII
(or a superset of it) in header field values. Therefore, this field SHOULD NOT
be used to convey protocol identifiers that are not printable ASCII, or those
that contain quote characters.


## Caching Alt-Svc Header Field Values

When an alternative service is advertised using Alt-Svc, it is considered fresh
for 24 hours from generation of the message. This can be modified with the 'ma'
(max-age) parameter;

    Alt-Svc: "h2"=443;ma=3600
    
which indicates the number of seconds since the response was generated the
alternative service is considered fresh for. 

    ma = delta-seconds

See {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache}} Section 4.2.3 for details of determining
response age. For example, a response:

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/html
    Cache-Control: 600
    Age: 30
    Alt-Svc: "h2c"=8000; ma=60

indicates that an alternative service is available and usable for the next 60
seconds. However, the response has already been cached for 30 seconds (as per
the Age header field value), so therefore the alternative service is only fresh
for the 30 seconds from when this response was received, minus estimated
transit time. 

When an Alt-Svc response header is received from an origin, its value
invalidates and replaces all cached alternative services for that origin.
   
See {{caching}} for general requirements on caching alternative services.

Note that the freshness lifetime for HTTP caching (here, 600 seconds) does not
affect caching of Alt-Svc values.


# The 4NN Not Authoritative HTTP Status Code {#status}

The 4NN (Not Authoritative) status code indicates that the origin server
(often, but not necessarily, an alternate service; see {{alternate}} is not
authoritative for the requested resource, in the sense of
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}}, Section 9.1.

A 4NN response is cacheable by default; i.e., unless otherwise indicated by the
method definition or explicit cache controls (see Section 4.2.2 of
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache}}).


# IANA Considerations

## The Alt-Svc Message Header Field

This document registers Alt-Svc in the Permanent Message Header Registry
{{RFC3864}}.

* Header Field Name: Alt-Svc
* Application Protocol: http
* Status: standard
* Author/Change Controller: IETF
* Specification Document: [this document]
* Related Information: 

## The 4NN Not Authoritative HTTP Status Code

This document registers the 4NN (Not Authoritative) HTTP Status code
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p2-semantics}}.

* Status Code: 4NN
* Short Description: Not Authoritative
* Specification: [this document], {{status}}

  
# Security Considerations

Identified security considerations should be enumerated in the appropriate
documents depending on which proposals are accepted. Those listed below are
generic to all uses of alternative services; more specific ones might be
necessary.

## Changing Ports

Using an alternative service implies accessing an origin's resources on an
alternative port, at a minimum. An attacker that can inject alternative services
and listen at the advertised port is therefore able to hijack an origin.

For example, an attacker that can add HTTP response header fields can redirect
traffic to a different port on the same host using the Alt-Svc header field; if
that port is under the attacker's control, they can thus masquerade as the HTTP
server.

This risk can be mitigated by restricting the ability to advertise alternative
services, and restricting who can open a port for listening on that host.

## Changing Hosts {#host_security}

When the host is changed due to the use of an alternative service, it presents
an opportunity for attackers to hijack communication to an origin.

For example, if an attacker can convince a user agent to send all traffic for
"innocent.example.org" to "evil.example.com" by successfully associating it as
an alternative service, they can masquerade as that origin. This can be done
locally (see mitigations above) or remotely (e.g., by an intermediary as a
man-in-the-middle attack).

This is the reason for the requirement in {{host_auth}} that any alternative
service with a host different to the origin's be strongly authenticated with
the origin's identity; i.e., presenting a certificate for the origin proves
that the alternative service is authorized to serve traffic for the origin.

However, this authorization is only as strong as the method used to
authenticate the alternative service. In particular, there are well-known
exploits to make an attacker's certificate appear as legitimate.

Alternative services could be used to persist such an attack; for example, an
intermediary could man-in-the-middle TLS-protected communication to a target,
and then direct all traffic to an alternative service with a large freshness
lifetime, so that the user agent still directs traffic to the attacker even when
not using the intermediary.

As a result, there is a requirement in {{caching}} to examine cached alternative
services when a network change is detected.

## Changing Protocols

When the ALPN protocol is changed due to the use of an alternative service, the
security properties of the new connection to the origin can be different from
that of the "normal" connection to the origin, because the protocol identifier
itself implies this.

For example, if a "https://" URI had a protocol advertised that does not use
some form of end-to-end encryption (most likely, TLS), it violates the
expectations for security that the URI scheme implies.

Therefore, clients cannot blindly use alternative services, but instead evaluate
the option(s) presented to assure that security requirements and expectations
(of specifications, implementations and end users) are met.



--- back


# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Eliot Lear, Stephen Farrell, Guy Podjarny, Stephen Ludin, Erik
Nygren, Paul Hoffman, Adam Langley, Will Chan and Richard Barnes for their
feedback and suggestions.

The Alt-Svc header field was influenced by the design of the
Alternative-Protocol header in SPDY.



# For HTTP/2: NOT_AUTHORITATIVE (13)  {#error}

The endpoint refuses the stream prior to performing any application processing.
This server is not configured to provide a definitive response for the
requested resource. Clients receiving this error code SHOULD remove the
endpoint from their cache of alternative services, if present.
