safe-hint/draft.md, before:

---
title: The "safe" HTTP Preference
abbrev: Preference for Safe Browsing
docname: draft-nottingham-safe-hint-07
date: 2018
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword:
 - safe
 - preference
 - child-protection

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  toc: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  inline: yes
  rfcedstyle: yes
  tocdepth: 1

author:
 -  ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: https://www.mnot.net/

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

This specification defines a "safe" preference for HTTP requests that expresses a desire to avoid
"objectionable" content, according to the definition of that term by the origin server.


--- middle

# Introduction

Many Web sites have a "safe" mode, to assist those who don't want to be exposed (or have their
children exposed) to objectionable content.

However, that goal is often difficult to achieve, because of the need to go to every Web site that
might be used, navigate to the appropriate page (possibly creating an account along the way) to get
a cookie {{?RFC6265}} set in the browser, for each browser on every device used.

A more manageable approach is for the browser to proactively indicate a preference for safe
content. A user agent that supports doing so (whether it be an individual browser, or through an
Operating System HTTP library) need only be configured once to assure that the preference is
advertised to a set of sites, or even all sites.

This specification defines how to declare this desire in requests as a HTTP Preference {{!RFC7240}}.

Note that this specification does not precisely define what "safe" is; rather, it is interpreted
within the scope of each Web site that chooses to act upon this information.

That said, the intent of "safe" is to allow end users (or those acting on their behalf) to express
a desire to avoid content that is considered objectionable within the cultural context of that
site; usually (but not always) content that is unsuitable for minors. The "safe" preference ought
not be used for other purposes.

Furthermore, sending "safe" does not guarantee that the Web site will use it. As such, its effect
can be described as "best effort," but not to be relied upon. In other words, sending the
preference is no more reliable than going to each Web site and manually selecting a "safe" mode,
but it is considerably easier.

It is also important to note that the "safe" preference is not a reliable indicator that the end
user is a child; other users might have a desire for unobjectionable content, and some children
might browse without the preference being set.

Simply put, it is a statement by (or on behalf of) the end user to the effect "If your site has a
'safe' setting, this user is hereby opting into that, according to your definition of the term."


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}} when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as
shown here.


# The "safe" Preference {#safe}

When present in a request, the "safe" preference indicates that the content which is not
objectionable is preferred, according to the origin server's definition of the concept.

For example, a request that includes the "safe" preference:

~~~
GET /foo.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.org
User-Agent: ExampleBrowser/1.0
Prefer: safe
~~~

User agents SHOULD include the "safe" preference in all HTTPS requests unless otherwise configured,
to ensure that the preference is available to the applicable resources. See {{browsers}} for more
information about configuring the set of resources "safe" is sent to.

Safe MAY be implemented in common HTTP libraries (e.g., an operating system might choose to insert
the preference in requests based upon system-wide configuration).

Origin servers that utilize the "safe" preference ought to document that they do so, along with the
criteria that they use to denote objectionable content. If a server has more fine-grained degrees
of "safety", it SHOULD select a reasonable default to use, and document that; it MAY use additional
mechanisms (e.g., cookies {{?RFC6265}}) to fine-tune.

A response corresponding to the request above might have headers that look like this:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Content-Type: text/html
Server: ExampleServer/2.0
Vary: Prefer
~~~

Note that the Vary response header needs to be sent if the response is cacheable and might change
depending on the value of the "Prefer" header. This is not only true for those responses that are
"safe", but also the default "unsafe" response.

See {{!RFC7234}} Section 4.1 for more information the interaction between Vary and Web caching.

See {{servers}} for additional advice specific to Web servers wishing to use "safe".


# Implementation Status

*Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.*

This section records the status of known implementations of the protocol defined by this
specification at the time of posting of this Internet-Draft. Please note that the listing of any
individual implementation here does not imply endorsement by the IETF. Furthermore, no effort has
been spent to verify the information presented here that was supplied by IETF contributors. This is
not intended as, and must not be construed to be, a catalog of available implementations or their
features. Readers are advised to note that other implementations may exist.

* Microsoft Internet Explorer - see https://support.microsoft.com/en-hk/help/2980016/
* Microsoft Bing - see https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/testdrive/demos/familysearch/
* Mozilla Firefox - see https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/block-and-unblock-websites-parental-controls-firef
* Cisco - see http://blogs.cisco.com/security/filtering-explicit-content


# Security Considerations

The "safe" preference is not a secure mechanism; it can be inserted or removed by intermediaries
with access to the request stream (e.g. for "http" URLs). Therefore, it SHOULD NOT be included in
requests with the "http" scheme.

Its presence reveals limited information about the user, which may be of small assistance in
"fingerprinting" the user by sites. Therefore, user agents SHOULD NOT include it in requests when
the user has expressed a desire to avoid such attacks (e.g., some forms of "private mode" browsing).

By its nature, including "safe" in requests does not assure that all content will actually be safe;
it is only when servers elect to honor it that content might be "safe".

Even then, a malicious server might adapt content so that it is even less "safe" (by some
definition of the word). As such, this mechanism on its own is not enough to assure that only
"safe" content is seen; those who wish to ensure that will need to combine its use with other
techniques (e.g., content filtering).

Furthermore, the server and user may have differing ideas regarding the semantics of "safe." As
such, the "safety" of the user's experience when browsing from site to site as well as over time
might (and probably will) change.



# IANA Considerations

This specification registers the "safe" preference {{!RFC7240}}:

* Preference: safe
* Value: (no value)
* Description: Indicates that "safe" / "unobjectionable" content is preferred.
* Reference: (this document)
* Notes:


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Alissa Cooper, Ilya Grigorik, Emma Llanso, Jeff Hughes, Lorrie Cranor, Doug Turner and
Dave Crocker for their comments.


# Sending "safe" from Web Browsers {#browsers}

As discussed in {{safe}}, there are many possible ways for the "safe" preference to be generated.
One possibility is for a Web browser to allow its users to configure the preference to be sent.

When doing so, it is important not to misrepresent the preference as binding to Web sites. For
example, an appropriate setting might be a checkbox with wording such as:

~~~
  [] Request "safe" content from Web sites
~~~

... along with further information available upon request.

Browsers might also allow the "safe" preference to be "locked" -- that is, prevent modification
without administrative access, or a passcode.

Note that this specification does not require browsers to send "safe" on all requests, although
that is one possible implementation; e.g., alternate implementation strategies include blacklists
and whitelists.


# Supporting "safe" on Web Sites {#servers}

Web sites that allow configuration of a "safe" mode (for example, using a cookie) can add support
for the "safe" preference incrementally; since the preference will not be supported by all clients
immediately, it is necessary to have another way to configure it.

When honoring the safe preference, it is important that it not be possible to disable it through
the Web site's interface, since "safe" may be configured and locked down by the browser or
computer's administrator (e.g., a parent). If the site has such a means of configuration (e.g.,
stored user preferences) and the safe preference is received in a request, the "safer"
interpretation ought to be used.

Likewise, sites might offer different levels of "safeness" through Web configuration, they will need to either inform their users of what level the "safe" hint corresponds to, or provide them with some means of adjusting it.

If the user expresses a wish to disable "safe" mode, the site can remind them that the safe
preference is being sent, and ask them to consult their administrator (since "safe" might be set by
a locked-down Operating System configuration).

As explained in {{safe}}, responses that change based upon the presence of the "safe" preference
need to either carry the "Vary: Prefer" response header field, or be uncacheable by shared caches
(e.g., with a "Cache-Control: private" response header field). This is to avoid an unsafe cached
response being served to a client that prefers safe content (or vice versa).

Commit message:

Note about default level of safety

safe-hint/draft.md, after:

---
title: The "safe" HTTP Preference
abbrev: Preference for Safe Browsing
docname: draft-nottingham-safe-hint-07
date: 2018
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword:
 - safe
 - preference
 - child-protection

stand_alone: yes
pi:
  toc: yes
  sortrefs: yes
  strict: yes
  comments: yes
  inline: yes
  rfcedstyle: yes
  tocdepth: 1

author:
 -  ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: https://www.mnot.net/

normative:

informative:


--- abstract

This specification defines a "safe" preference for HTTP requests that expresses a desire to avoid
"objectionable" content, according to the definition of that term by the origin server.


--- middle

# Introduction

Many Web sites have a "safe" mode, to assist those who don't want to be exposed (or have their
children exposed) to objectionable content.

However, that goal is often difficult to achieve, because of the need to go to every Web site that
might be used, navigate to the appropriate page (possibly creating an account along the way) to get
a cookie {{?RFC6265}} set in the browser, for each browser on every device used.

A more manageable approach is for the browser to proactively indicate a preference for safe
content. A user agent that supports doing so (whether it be an individual browser, or through an
Operating System HTTP library) need only be configured once to assure that the preference is
advertised to a set of sites, or even all sites.

This specification defines how to declare this desire in requests as a HTTP Preference {{!RFC7240}}.

Note that this specification does not precisely define what "safe" is; rather, it is interpreted
within the scope of each Web site that chooses to act upon this information.

That said, the intent of "safe" is to allow end users (or those acting on their behalf) to express
a desire to avoid content that is considered objectionable within the cultural context of that
site; usually (but not always) content that is unsuitable for minors. The "safe" preference ought
not be used for other purposes.

Furthermore, sending "safe" does not guarantee that the Web site will use it. As such, its effect
can be described as "best effort," but not to be relied upon. In other words, sending the
preference is no more reliable than going to each Web site and manually selecting a "safe" mode,
but it is considerably easier.

It is also important to note that the "safe" preference is not a reliable indicator that the end
user is a child; other users might have a desire for unobjectionable content, and some children
might browse without the preference being set.

Simply put, it is a statement by (or on behalf of) the end user to the effect "If your site has a
'safe' setting, this user is hereby opting into that, according to your definition of the term."


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}} when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as
shown here.


# The "safe" Preference {#safe}

When present in a request, the "safe" preference indicates that the content which is not
objectionable is preferred, according to the origin server's definition of the concept.

For example, a request that includes the "safe" preference:

~~~
GET /foo.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.org
User-Agent: ExampleBrowser/1.0
Prefer: safe
~~~

User agents SHOULD include the "safe" preference in all HTTPS requests unless otherwise configured,
to ensure that the preference is available to the applicable resources. See {{browsers}} for more
information about configuring the set of resources "safe" is sent to.

Safe MAY be implemented in common HTTP libraries (e.g., an operating system might choose to insert
the preference in requests based upon system-wide configuration).

Origin servers that utilize the "safe" preference ought to document that they do so, along with the
criteria that they use to denote objectionable content. If a server has more fine-grained degrees
of "safety", it SHOULD select a reasonable default to use, and document that; it MAY use additional
mechanisms (e.g., cookies {{?RFC6265}}) to fine-tune.

A response corresponding to the request above might have headers that look like this:

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Content-Type: text/html
Server: ExampleServer/2.0
Vary: Prefer
~~~

Note that the Vary response header needs to be sent if the response is cacheable and might change
depending on the value of the "Prefer" header. This is not only true for those responses that are
"safe", but also the default "unsafe" response.

See {{!RFC7234}} Section 4.1 for more information the interaction between Vary and Web caching.

See {{servers}} for additional advice specific to Web servers wishing to use "safe".


# Implementation Status

*Note to RFC Editor: Please remove this section before publication.*

This section records the status of known implementations of the protocol defined by this
specification at the time of posting of this Internet-Draft. Please note that the listing of any
individual implementation here does not imply endorsement by the IETF. Furthermore, no effort has
been spent to verify the information presented here that was supplied by IETF contributors. This is
not intended as, and must not be construed to be, a catalog of available implementations or their
features. Readers are advised to note that other implementations may exist.

* Microsoft Internet Explorer - see https://support.microsoft.com/en-hk/help/2980016/
* Microsoft Bing - see https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-edge/testdrive/demos/familysearch/
* Mozilla Firefox - see https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/block-and-unblock-websites-parental-controls-firef
* Cisco - see http://blogs.cisco.com/security/filtering-explicit-content


# Security Considerations

The "safe" preference is not a secure mechanism; it can be inserted or removed by intermediaries
with access to the request stream (e.g. for "http" URLs). Therefore, it SHOULD NOT be included in
requests with the "http" scheme.

Its presence reveals limited information about the user, which may be of small assistance in
"fingerprinting" the user by sites. Therefore, user agents SHOULD NOT include it in requests when
the user has expressed a desire to avoid such attacks (e.g., some forms of "private mode" browsing).

By its nature, including "safe" in requests does not assure that all content will actually be safe;
it is only when servers elect to honor it that content might be "safe".

Even then, a malicious server might adapt content so that it is even less "safe" (by some
definition of the word). As such, this mechanism on its own is not enough to assure that only
"safe" content is seen; those who wish to ensure that will need to combine its use with other
techniques (e.g., content filtering).

Furthermore, the server and user may have differing ideas regarding the semantics of "safe." As
such, the "safety" of the user's experience when browsing from site to site as well as over time
might (and probably will) change.



# IANA Considerations

This specification registers the "safe" preference {{!RFC7240}}:

* Preference: safe
* Value: (no value)
* Description: Indicates that "safe" / "unobjectionable" content is preferred.
* Reference: (this document)
* Notes:


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Alissa Cooper, Ilya Grigorik, Emma Llanso, Jeff Hughes, Lorrie Cranor, Doug Turner and
Dave Crocker for their comments.


# Sending "safe" from Web Browsers {#browsers}

As discussed in {{safe}}, there are many possible ways for the "safe" preference to be generated.
One possibility is for a Web browser to allow its users to configure the preference to be sent.

When doing so, it is important not to misrepresent the preference as binding to Web sites. For
example, an appropriate setting might be a checkbox with wording such as:

~~~
  [] Request "safe" content from Web sites
~~~

... along with further information available upon request.

Browsers might also allow the "safe" preference to be "locked" -- that is, prevent modification
without administrative access, or a passcode.

Note that this specification does not require browsers to send "safe" on all requests, although
that is one possible implementation; e.g., alternate implementation strategies include blacklists
and whitelists.


# Supporting "safe" on Web Sites {#servers}

Web sites that allow configuration of a "safe" mode (for example, using a cookie) can add support
for the "safe" preference incrementally; since the preference will not be supported by all clients
immediately, it is necessary to have another way to configure it.

When honoring the safe preference, it is important that it not be possible to disable it through
the Web site's interface, since "safe" may be configured and locked down by the browser or
computer's administrator (e.g., a parent). If the site has such a means of configuration (e.g.,
stored user preferences) and the safe preference is received in a request, the "safer"
interpretation ought to be used.

The appropriate level of "safety" is a site-specific decision. When selecting it, sites ought to
bear in mind that disabling the preference might be considerably more onerous than through other
means, especially if the preference is generated based upon Operating System configuration.

Sites might offer different levels of "safeness" through Web configuration, they will need to
either inform their users of what level the "safe" hint corresponds to, or provide them with some
means of adjusting it.

If the user expresses a wish to disable "safe" mode, the site can remind them that the safe
preference is being sent, and ask them to consult their administrator (since "safe" might be set by
a locked-down Operating System configuration).

As explained in {{safe}}, responses that change based upon the presence of the "safe" preference
need to either carry the "Vary: Prefer" response header field, or be uncacheable by shared caches
(e.g., with a "Cache-Control: private" response header field). This is to avoid an unsafe cached
response being served to a client that prefers safe content (or vice versa).
