dnsop-onion-tld/draft.md, before:

---
title: The .onion Special-Use Domain Name
abbrev: .onion
docname: draft-ietf-dnsop-onion-tld-00
date: 2015
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: dnsop
keyword: 
 - Internet-Draft
 - onion
 - tld
 - dns

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 - 
    ins: J. Appelbaum
    name: Jacob Appelbaum
    organization: The Tor Project, Inc
    email: jacob@appelbaum.net
 -
    ins: A. Muffett
    name: Alec Muffett
    organization: Facebook
    email: alecm@fb.com    

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC6761:

informative:
  RFC1928:
  RFC3986:
  RFC7230:
  Dingledine2004:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/tor-spec"
    title: "Tor: the second-generation onion router"
    author:
      - ins: R. Dingledine
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: P. Syverson
    date: 2004
  tor-address:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/address-spec"
    title: "Special Hostnames in Tor"
    author:
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: R. Dingledine
    date: September 2001
  tor-rendezvous:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/rend-spec"
    title: "Tor Rendezvous Specification"
    author: 
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: R. Dingledine
    date: April 2014

--- abstract

This document registers the ".onion" Special-Use Domain Name.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Tor network {{Dingledine2004}} has the ability to host network services
using the ".onion" Special-Use Top-Level Domain. Such names can be used as other domain
names would be (e.g., in URLs {{RFC3986}}), but instead of using the DNS
infrastructure, .onion names functionally correspond to the identity of a
given service, thereby combining location and authentication.

.onion names are often used to provide access to end to end encrypted, secure,
anonymized services; that is, the identity and location of the server is
obscured from the client. The location of the client is obscured from the
server. The identity of the client may or may not be disclosed through an
optional cryptographic authentication process.

.onion names are self-authenticating, in that they are derived from the
cryptographic keys used by the server in a client verifiable manner during
connection establishment. As a result, the cryptographic label component of a
.onion name is not intended to be human-meaningful.

The Tor network is designed to not be subject to any central controlling
authorities with regards to routing and service publication, so .onion names
cannot be registered, assigned, transferred or revoked. "Ownership" of a .onion
name is derived solely from control of a public/private key pair which
corresponds to the algorithmic derivation of the name.

In this way, .onion names are "special" in the sense defined by {{RFC6761}}
Section 3; they require hardware and software implementations to change their
handling, in order to achieve the desired properties of the name (see
{{security}}). These differences are listed in {{onion}}.

Like Top-Level Domain Names, .onion names can have an arbitrary number of subdomain components. This information is not meaningful to the Tor protocol, but can be used in application protocols like HTTP {{RFC7230}}.

See {{tor-address}} and {{tor-rendezvous}} for the details of the creation and
use of .onion names.

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


# The ".onion" Special-Use Domain Name {#onion}

These properties have the following effects upon parties using or processing
.onion names (as per {{RFC6761}}):

1. Users: Human users are expected to recognize .onion names as having
different security properties, and also being only available through software
that is aware of onion names.

2. Application Software: Applications (including proxies) that implement the Tor 
protocol MUST recognize .onion names as special by either accessing them directly, 
or using a proxy (e.g., SOCKS {{RFC1928}}) to do so. Applications that do not 
implement the Tor protocol SHOULD generate an error upon the use of .onion, and 
SHOULD NOT perform a DNS lookup.

3. Name Resolution APIs and Libraries: Resolvers MUST either respond to 
requests for .onion names by resolving them according to {{tor-rendezvous}} or by 
responding with NXDOMAIN.

4. Caching DNS Servers: Caching servers SHOULD NOT attempt to look up records
for .onion names. They MUST generate NXDOMAIN for all such queries.

5. Authoritative DNS Servers: Authoritative servers MUST respond to queries
for .onion with NXDOMAIN.

6. DNS Server Operators: Operators MUST NOT configure an authoritative DNS
server to answer queries for .onion. If they do so, client software is likely
to ignore any results (see above).

7. DNS Registries/Registrars: Registrars MUST NOT register .onion names; all
such requests MUST be denied.

Note that the restriction upon the registration of .onion names does not
prohibit IANA from inserting a record into the root zone database to reserve
the name.

Likewise, it does not prevent non-DNS service providers such as (trust
providers) from supporting .onion names in their applications.

# IANA Considerations

This document registers "onion" in the registry of Special-Use Domain Names {{RFC6761}}. See {{onion}} for the registration template.

# Security Considerations {#security}

The security properties of .onion names can be compromised if, for example:

* The server "leaks" its identity in another way (e.g., in an application-level message), or
* The access protocol is implemented or deployed incorrectly, or
* The access protocol itself is found to have a flaw.

Users must take special precautions to ensure that the .onion name they are
communicating with is correct, as attackers may be able to find keys which
produce service names that are visually or semantically similar to
the desired service.

Also, users need to understand the difference between a .onion name used and
accessed directly via Tor-capable software, versus .onion subdomains of other
top-level domain names and providers (e.g., the difference between example.onion and
example.onion.tld).

The cryptographic label for a .onion name is constructed by applying a
function to the public key of the server, the output of which is rendered
as a string and concatenated with the string ".onion". Dependent upon the
specifics of the function used, an attacker may be able to find a key that
produces a collision with the same .onion name with substantially less work
than a cryptographic attack on the full strength key. If this is possible the
attacker may be able to impersonate the service on the network.

A legacy client may inadvertently attempt to resolve a ".onion" name through
the DNS. This causes a disclosure that the client is using TOR to reach a
specific service. Malicious resolvers could be engineered to capture and
record such leaks, which might have very adverse consequences for the
well-being of the TOR user. This issue is mitigated if the client's TOR
software is updated to not leak such queries, or if the client's DNS
software is updated to drop any request to the ".onion" TLD.


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Roger Dingledine, Linus Nordberg, and Seth David Schoen for their input and review.

This specification builds upon previous work by Christian Grothoff, Matthias Wachs, Hellekin
O. Wolf, Jacob Appelbaum, and Leif Ryge to register .onion in conjunction with other, 
similar Special-Use Top-Level Domain Names.

Commit message:

Indicate that .onion names still have to be valid
as per Stephen

dnsop-onion-tld/draft.md, after:

---
title: The .onion Special-Use Domain Name
abbrev: .onion
docname: draft-ietf-dnsop-onion-tld-00
date: 2015
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: dnsop
keyword: 
 - Internet-Draft
 - onion
 - tld
 - dns

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 - 
    ins: J. Appelbaum
    name: Jacob Appelbaum
    organization: The Tor Project, Inc
    email: jacob@appelbaum.net
 -
    ins: A. Muffett
    name: Alec Muffett
    organization: Facebook
    email: alecm@fb.com    

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC6761:

informative:
  RFC1034:
  RFC1123:
  RFC1928:
  RFC3986:
  RFC7230:
  Dingledine2004:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/tor-spec"
    title: "Tor: the second-generation onion router"
    author:
      - ins: R. Dingledine
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: P. Syverson
    date: 2004
  tor-address:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/address-spec"
    title: "Special Hostnames in Tor"
    author:
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: R. Dingledine
    date: September 2001
  tor-rendezvous:
    target: "https://spec.torproject.org/rend-spec"
    title: "Tor Rendezvous Specification"
    author: 
      - ins: N. Mathewson
      - ins: R. Dingledine
    date: April 2014

--- abstract

This document registers the ".onion" Special-Use Domain Name.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Tor network {{Dingledine2004}} has the ability to host network services
using the ".onion" Special-Use Top-Level Domain. Such names can be used as other domain
names would be (e.g., in URLs {{RFC3986}}), but instead of using the DNS
infrastructure, .onion names functionally correspond to the identity of a
given service, thereby combining location and authentication.

.onion names are often used to provide access to end to end encrypted, secure,
anonymized services; that is, the identity and location of the server is
obscured from the client. The location of the client is obscured from the
server. The identity of the client may or may not be disclosed through an
optional cryptographic authentication process.

.onion names are self-authenticating, in that they are derived from the
cryptographic keys used by the server in a client verifiable manner during
connection establishment. As a result, the cryptographic label component of a
.onion name is not intended to be human-meaningful.

The Tor network is designed to not be subject to any central controlling
authorities with regards to routing and service publication, so .onion names
cannot be registered, assigned, transferred or revoked. "Ownership" of a .onion
name is derived solely from control of a public/private key pair which
corresponds to the algorithmic derivation of the name.

In this way, .onion names are "special" in the sense defined by {{RFC6761}}
Section 3; they require hardware and software implementations to change their
handling, in order to achieve the desired properties of the name (see
{{security}}). These differences are listed in {{onion}}.

Like Top-Level Domain Names, .onion names can have an arbitrary number of
subdomain components. This information is not meaningful to the Tor protocol,
but can be used in application protocols like HTTP {{RFC7230}}. Note that such
names must conform to DNS name syntax (as defined in Section 3.5 of {{RFC1034}}
and Section 2.1 of {{RFC1123}}), as they will still be exposed to DNS
implementations.

See {{tor-address}} and {{tor-rendezvous}} for the details of the creation and
use of .onion names.

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


# The ".onion" Special-Use Domain Name {#onion}

These properties have the following effects upon parties using or processing
.onion names (as per {{RFC6761}}):

1. Users: Human users are expected to recognize .onion names as having
different security properties, and also being only available through software
that is aware of onion names.

2. Application Software: Applications (including proxies) that implement the Tor 
protocol MUST recognize .onion names as special by either accessing them directly, 
or using a proxy (e.g., SOCKS {{RFC1928}}) to do so. Applications that do not 
implement the Tor protocol SHOULD generate an error upon the use of .onion, and 
SHOULD NOT perform a DNS lookup.

3. Name Resolution APIs and Libraries: Resolvers MUST either respond to 
requests for .onion names by resolving them according to {{tor-rendezvous}} or by 
responding with NXDOMAIN.

4. Caching DNS Servers: Caching servers SHOULD NOT attempt to look up records
for .onion names. They MUST generate NXDOMAIN for all such queries.

5. Authoritative DNS Servers: Authoritative servers MUST respond to queries
for .onion with NXDOMAIN.

6. DNS Server Operators: Operators MUST NOT configure an authoritative DNS
server to answer queries for .onion. If they do so, client software is likely
to ignore any results (see above).

7. DNS Registries/Registrars: Registrars MUST NOT register .onion names; all
such requests MUST be denied.

Note that the restriction upon the registration of .onion names does not
prohibit IANA from inserting a record into the root zone database to reserve
the name.

Likewise, it does not prevent non-DNS service providers such as (trust
providers) from supporting .onion names in their applications.

# IANA Considerations

This document registers "onion" in the registry of Special-Use Domain Names {{RFC6761}}. See {{onion}} for the registration template.

# Security Considerations {#security}

The security properties of .onion names can be compromised if, for example:

* The server "leaks" its identity in another way (e.g., in an application-level message), or
* The access protocol is implemented or deployed incorrectly, or
* The access protocol itself is found to have a flaw.

Users must take special precautions to ensure that the .onion name they are
communicating with is correct, as attackers may be able to find keys which
produce service names that are visually or semantically similar to
the desired service.

Also, users need to understand the difference between a .onion name used and
accessed directly via Tor-capable software, versus .onion subdomains of other
top-level domain names and providers (e.g., the difference between example.onion and
example.onion.tld).

The cryptographic label for a .onion name is constructed by applying a
function to the public key of the server, the output of which is rendered
as a string and concatenated with the string ".onion". Dependent upon the
specifics of the function used, an attacker may be able to find a key that
produces a collision with the same .onion name with substantially less work
than a cryptographic attack on the full strength key. If this is possible the
attacker may be able to impersonate the service on the network.

A legacy client may inadvertently attempt to resolve a ".onion" name through
the DNS. This causes a disclosure that the client is using TOR to reach a
specific service. Malicious resolvers could be engineered to capture and
record such leaks, which might have very adverse consequences for the
well-being of the TOR user. This issue is mitigated if the client's TOR
software is updated to not leak such queries, or if the client's DNS
software is updated to drop any request to the ".onion" TLD.


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Roger Dingledine, Linus Nordberg, and Seth David Schoen for their input and review.

This specification builds upon previous work by Christian Grothoff, Matthias Wachs, Hellekin
O. Wolf, Jacob Appelbaum, and Leif Ryge to register .onion in conjunction with other, 
similar Special-Use Top-Level Domain Names.
