h2-vpn/draft.md, before:

---
title: Virtual Private Networking over HTTP/2
abbrev: H2-VPN
docname: draft-nottingham-h2-vpn-00
date: 2015
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC0791:
  RFC2460:
  RFC2119:
  RFC7540:

informative:


--- abstract

This document describes a set of extensions that allow an IP-based Virtual Private Network to be created over a HTTP/2 connection.

--- note_Note_to_Readers

The issues list for this draft can be found at <https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/h2-vpn>.


--- middle

# Introduction

Virtual Private Networks have become a common means of assuring that traffic is carried over a
protected network. However, current VPN technologies can often be easily discriminated from non-VPN
traffic, leading to them being blocked in some networks.

As HTTP/2 is deployed more, it becomes an attractive substrate for carrying a VPN, due to its lack
of discriminators, its multiplexed, low-overhead framing layer, its typical use of encryption, and
the large number of HTTP endpoints on the Internet.

This document describes a set of extensions that allow an IP-based Virtual Private Network to be created over a HTTP/2 connection.


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.


# Extensions for VPN over HTTP/2


## The STARTVPN HTTP/2 Frame Type

The STARTVPN frame (type=0xTBD) is used to open a stream ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.1) that represents
a Virtual Private Network. 

A STARTVPN frame can be sent on a stream in the "idle" state to request creation of a VPN with the
peer; it transitions the stream to the "open" state. Once a stream is opened in this fashion, the
recipient can send a single STARTVPN frame to acknowledge the opening, or a RST_STREAM frame to
close the stream.

STARTVPN frames MAY also contain padding. Padding can be added to STARTVPN frames to obscure the
size of messages. Padding is a security feature; see {{RFC7540}}, Section 10.7.

~~~
 +---------------+
 |Pad Length? (8)|
 +---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
 |                          Auth Data (*)                      ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                           Padding (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
~~~

The STARTVPN frame payload has the following fields:

* Auth Data: Authentication data. This field can carry arbitrary authentication data, typically
  pre-arranged with the server. 
* Pad Length: An 8-bit field containing the length of the frame padding in units of octets. This field is only present if the PADDED flag is set.
* Padding: Padding octets that contain no application semantic value. Padding octets MUST be set to zero when sending. A receiver is not obligated to verify padding but MAY treat non-zero padding as a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

The STARTVPN frame defines the following flags:

* PADDED (0x0): When set, bit 0 indicates that the Pad Length field and any padding that it describes are present.

The total number of padding octets is determined by the value of the Pad Length field. If the
length of the padding is the length of the frame payload or greater, the recipient MUST treat this
as a connection error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

STARTVPN frames MUST be associated with a stream. If a STARTVPN frame is received whose stream
identifier field is 0x0, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section
5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.


## The IP HTTP/2 Frame Type

IP frames (type=0xTBD) convey individual IP packets in the Virtual Private Network associated with the stream ID.

IP frames MAY also contain padding. Padding can be added to IP frames to obscure the size of messages. Padding is a security feature; see {{RFC7540}}, Section 10.7.

~~~
 +---------------+
 |Pad Length? (8)|
 +---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
 |                           IP Data (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                           Padding (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
~~~

The IP frame contains the following fields:

* Pad Length: An 8-bit field containing the length of the frame padding in units of octets. This field is conditional (as signified by a "?" in the diagram) and is only present if the PADDED flag is set.
* IP Data: Transport data. The amount of data is the remainder of the frame payload after subtracting the length of the other fields that are present.
* Padding: Padding octets that contain no application semantic value. Padding octets MUST be set to zero when sending. A receiver is not obligated to verify padding but MAY treat non-zero padding as a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

The IP frame defines the following flags:

* END_STREAM (0x1): When set, bit 0 indicates that this frame is the last that the endpoint will send for the identified stream. Setting this flag causes the stream to enter one of the "half-closed" states or the "closed" state ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.1).
* V6 (0x2): When set, bit 1 indicates that this frame is an IPv6 {{RFC2460}} frame; otherwise, it is an IPv4 {{RFC0791}} frame.
* PADDED (0x4): When set, bit 3 indicates that the Pad Length field and any padding that it describes are present.

IP frames MUST be associated with a stream. If an IP frame is received whose stream identifier
field is 0x0, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of
type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

IP frames are subject to flow control ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.2) and can only be sent when a stream
is in the "open" or "half-closed (remote)" state. The entire IP frame payload is included in flow
control, including the Pad Length and Padding fields if present. If an IP frame is received whose
stream is not in "open" or "half-closed (local)" state, the recipient MUST respond with a stream
error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.2) of type STREAM_CLOSED.

The total number of padding octets is determined by the value of the Pad Length field. If the
length of the padding is the length of the frame payload or greater, the recipient MUST treat this
as a connection error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Note: An IP frame can be increased in size by one octet by including a Pad Length field with a
value of zero.


# VPN over HTTP/2 Operation

After a HTTP/2 connection is started (e.g., using the "h2" protocol identifier), either peer MAY
initiate a VPN by sending a STARTVPN frame.

The initiating STARTVPN SHOULD contain authentication data to allow the recipient to determine
whether its peer is authorized to create a VPN; however, alternative mechanisms MAY be used (e.g.,
TLS client certificates).

If the other peer is willing and able to create a VPN, it will reply with a STARTVPN frame on the
same stream. Otherwise, as per HTTP/2, it MUST ignore the frame. IP frames MUST not be sent by either peer before a STARTVPN frame is received.

Note that HTTP/2 connections MAY carry multiple VPN connections simultaneously, and MAY also carry
normal HTTP traffic.

Upon successful establishment of a VPN, the peers can begin exchanging IP frames. Address discovery can occur as would over a normal IP connection (e.g., using static configuration or DHCP).


# IANA Considerations

This document defines two entries in the HTTP/2 Frame Type registry.

* Frame Type: STARTVPN
* Code: TBD
* Specification: [this document]

* Frame Type: IP
* Code: TBD
* Specification: [this document]


# Security Considerations

This specification is designed to avoid the exposure of discriminators to observers, to make it
more difficult to block a VPN. However, VPN traffic has different characteristics (e.g., traffic
volumes and timing, especially when it's possible to compare "normal" HTTP/2 traffic to it. Padding
(both in the IP frames and the HTTP/2 HEADERS and DATA frames) may partially mitigate these attacks.

--- back

Commit message:

use Experimental use frame types; add magic.

h2-vpn/draft.md, after:

---
title: Virtual Private Networking over HTTP/2
abbrev: H2-VPN
docname: draft-nottingham-h2-vpn-00
date: 2015
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC0791:
  RFC2460:
  RFC2119:
  RFC7540:

informative:


--- abstract

This document describes a set of extensions that allow an IP-based Virtual Private Network to be created over a HTTP/2 connection.

--- note_Note_to_Readers

The issues list for this draft can be found at <https://github.com/mnot/I-D/labels/h2-vpn>.


--- middle

# Introduction

Virtual Private Networks have become a common means of assuring that traffic is carried over a
protected network. However, current VPN technologies can often be easily discriminated from non-VPN
traffic, leading to them being blocked in some networks.

As HTTP/2 is deployed more, it becomes an attractive substrate for carrying a VPN, due to its lack
of discriminators, its multiplexed, low-overhead framing layer, its typical use of encryption, and
the large number of HTTP endpoints on the Internet.

This document describes a set of extensions that allow an IP-based Virtual Private Network to be created over a HTTP/2 connection.


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
{{RFC2119}}.


# Extensions for VPN over HTTP/2


## The STARTVPN HTTP/2 Frame Type

The STARTVPN frame (type=0xf0) is used to open a stream ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.1) that represents
a Virtual Private Network. 

A STARTVPN frame can be sent on a stream in the "idle" state to request creation of a VPN with the
peer; it transitions the stream to the "open" state. Once a stream is opened in this fashion, the
recipient can send a single STARTVPN frame to acknowledge the opening, or a RST_STREAM frame to
close the stream.

STARTVPN frames MAY also contain padding. Padding can be added to STARTVPN frames to obscure the
size of messages. Padding is a security feature; see {{RFC7540}}, Section 10.7.

~~~
 +---------------+---------------+
 |   Magic (8)   |Pad Length? (8)|
 +---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
 |                          Auth Data (*)                      ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                           Padding (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
~~~

The STARTVPN frame payload has the following fields:

* Magic: Because this protocol uses HTTP/2 Experimental Use frame types, a prefix is used to disambiguate its use. This value is fixed as the ASCII string "nocensor" (0x6e 0x6f 0x63 0x65 0x6e 0x73 0x6f 0x72).
* Auth Data: Authentication data. This field can carry arbitrary authentication data, typically
  pre-arranged with the server. 
* Pad Length: An 8-bit field containing the length of the frame padding in units of octets. This field is only present if the PADDED flag is set.
* Padding: Padding octets that contain no application semantic value. Padding octets MUST be set to zero when sending. A receiver is not obligated to verify padding but MAY treat non-zero padding as a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

The STARTVPN frame defines the following flags:

* PADDED (0x0): When set, bit 0 indicates that the Pad Length field and any padding that it describes are present.

The total number of padding octets is determined by the value of the Pad Length field. If the
length of the padding is the length of the frame payload or greater, the recipient MUST treat this
as a connection error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

STARTVPN frames MUST be associated with a stream. If a STARTVPN frame is received whose stream
identifier field is 0x0, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section
5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.


## The IP HTTP/2 Frame Type

IP frames (type=0xf1) convey individual IP packets in the Virtual Private Network associated with the stream ID.

IP frames MAY also contain padding. Padding can be added to IP frames to obscure the size of messages. Padding is a security feature; see {{RFC7540}}, Section 10.7.

~~~
 +---------------+
 |Pad Length? (8)|
 +---------------+-----------------------------------------------+
 |                           IP Data (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
 |                           Padding (*)                       ...
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
~~~

The IP frame contains the following fields:

* Pad Length: An 8-bit field containing the length of the frame padding in units of octets. This field is conditional (as signified by a "?" in the diagram) and is only present if the PADDED flag is set.
* IP Data: Transport data. The amount of data is the remainder of the frame payload after subtracting the length of the other fields that are present.
* Padding: Padding octets that contain no application semantic value. Padding octets MUST be set to zero when sending. A receiver is not obligated to verify padding but MAY treat non-zero padding as a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

The IP frame defines the following flags:

* END_STREAM (0x1): When set, bit 0 indicates that this frame is the last that the endpoint will send for the identified stream. Setting this flag causes the stream to enter one of the "half-closed" states or the "closed" state ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.1).
* V6 (0x2): When set, bit 1 indicates that this frame is an IPv6 {{RFC2460}} frame; otherwise, it is an IPv4 {{RFC0791}} frame.
* PADDED (0x4): When set, bit 3 indicates that the Pad Length field and any padding that it describes are present.

IP frames MUST be associated with a stream. If an IP frame is received whose stream identifier
field is 0x0, the recipient MUST respond with a connection error ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.4.1) of
type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

IP frames are subject to flow control ({{RFC7540}}, Section 5.2) and can only be sent when a stream
is in the "open" or "half-closed (remote)" state. The entire IP frame payload is included in flow
control, including the Pad Length and Padding fields if present. If an IP frame is received whose
stream is not in "open" or "half-closed (local)" state, the recipient MUST respond with a stream
error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.2) of type STREAM_CLOSED.

The total number of padding octets is determined by the value of the Pad Length field. If the
length of the padding is the length of the frame payload or greater, the recipient MUST treat this
as a connection error ({{RFC7540}} Section 5.4.1) of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Note: An IP frame can be increased in size by one octet by including a Pad Length field with a
value of zero.


# VPN over HTTP/2 Operation

After a HTTP/2 connection is started (e.g., using the "h2" protocol identifier), either peer MAY
initiate a VPN by sending a STARTVPN frame.

The initiating STARTVPN SHOULD contain authentication data to allow the recipient to determine
whether its peer is authorized to create a VPN; however, alternative mechanisms MAY be used (e.g.,
TLS client certificates).

If the other peer is willing and able to create a VPN, it will reply with a STARTVPN frame on the
same stream. Otherwise, as per HTTP/2, it MUST ignore the frame. IP frames MUST not be sent by either peer before a STARTVPN frame is received.

Note that HTTP/2 connections MAY carry multiple VPN connections simultaneously, and MAY also carry
normal HTTP traffic.

Upon successful establishment of a VPN, the peers can begin exchanging IP frames. Address discovery can occur as would over a normal IP connection (e.g., using static configuration or DHCP).


# IANA Considerations

This document does not require action by IANA.


# Security Considerations

This specification is designed to avoid the exposure of discriminators to observers, to make it
more difficult to block a VPN. However, VPN traffic has different characteristics (e.g., traffic
volumes and timing, especially when it's possible to compare "normal" HTTP/2 traffic to it. Padding
(both in the IP frames and the HTTP/2 HEADERS and DATA frames) may partially mitigate these attacks.

--- back
