http-encryption-encoding/draft.md, before:

---
title: Encrypted Content-Encoding for HTTP
abbrev: HTTP encryption coding
docname: draft-nottingham-http-encryption-encoding-01
date: 2015
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC4492:
  RFC4648:
  RFC7230:
  RFC7231:
  AES:
    title: Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: November 2001
    seriesinfo: FIPS PUB 197
  NIST80038D:
    title: "Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and GMAC"
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: December 2001
    seriesinfo: NIST PUB 800-38D
  FIPS180-2:
    title: NIST FIPS 180-2, Secure Hash Standard
    author:
      name: NIST
      ins: National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce
    date: 2002-08

informative:
  RFC5226:
  RFC5246:
  RFC7235:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
  FIPS186:
    title: "Digital Signature Standard (DSS)"
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: July 2013
    seriesinfo: NIST PUB 186-4
  X.692:
     title: "Public Key Cryptography For The Financial Services Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)"
     author:
       - org: ANSI
     seriesinfo: ANSI X9.62, 1998.

--- abstract

This memo introduces a content-coding for HTTP that allows message payloads to be encrypted.


--- middle

# Introduction

It is sometimes desirable to encrypt the contents of a HTTP message (request or response) in a
persistent manner, so that when the payload is stored (e.g., with a HTTP PUT), only someone with
the appropriate key can read it.

For example, it might be necessary to store a file on a server without exposing its contents to
that server. Furthermore, that same file could be replicated to other servers (to make it more
resistant to server or network failure), downloaded by clients (to make it available offline), etc.
without exposing its contents.

These uses are not met by the use of TLS [RFC5246], since it only encrypts the channel between the
client and server.

This document specifies a content-coding [RFC7231]) for HTTP to serve these and other use cases.

This mechanism is likely only a small part of a larger design that uses content encryption.  In
particular, this document does not describe key management practices.  How clients and servers
acquire and identify keys will depend on the use case.


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119].


# The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding {#aesgcm128}

The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding indicates that a payload has been encrypted using Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) {{AES}} {{NIST80038D}}, using a 128 bit
content encryption key.

When this content-coding is in use, the Encryption header field {{encryption}} MUST be present, and
MUST include sufficient information to determine the content encryption key (see {{derivation}}).

The "aesgcm-128" content-coding uses a fixed block size for any given payload.  Each block is
followed by a 128-bit authentication tag.  The block size defaults to 4096 octets, but can be changed
using the "bs" parameter on the Encryption header field.  This block size is not to be mistaken for
the block size of the cipher.

The encrypted content is therefore a sequence of blocks, each with a length equal to the value of
the "bs" parameter, and 16 octets of authentication tag.

~~~
+-------------------------------+-----------------+
| Encrypted Content (bs octets) | Tag (16 octets) |
+-------------------------------+-----------------+
~~~

The plaintext can be of any size up to the block size.  AES-GCM does not require padding of
plaintext, so the space consumed by the ciphertext can be computed by adding the length of
the authentication tag to the bs parameter.

Each block contains between 0 and 255 bytes of padding, inserted into a block before the enciphered
content.  The length of the padding is stored in the first byte of the payload.  All padding bytes
MUST be set to zero.  It is a fatal decryption error to have a block with more padding than the
block size.

The initialization vector for each block is a 96-bit value containing the index of the current
block in network byte order.  Blocks are indexed starting at zero.

The additional data passed to the AES-GCM algorithm consists of the concatenation of:

1. the ASCII-encoded string "Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128" (with no trailing 0),
2. a zero octet, and
3. the index of the current block encoded as a 64-bit unsigned integer in network byte order.


# The "Encryption" HTTP header field  {#encryption}

The "Encryption" HTTP header field describes the encrypted content encoding(s) that have been
applied to a message payload, and therefore how those content encoding(s) can be removed.

~~~
  Encryption-val = #cipher_params
  cipher_params = [ param *( ";" param ) ]
~~~

If the payload is encrypted more than once (as reflected by having multiple content-codings that
imply encryption), each cipher is reflected in the Encryption header field, in the order in which
they were applied.

The Encryption header MAY be omitted if the sender does not intend for the immediate recipient to
be able to decrypt the message.  Alternatively, the Encryption header field MAY be omitted if the
sender intends for the recipient to acquire the header field by other means.

Servers processing PUT requests MUST persist the value of the Encryption header field, unless they
remove the content-coding by decrypting the payload.


## Encryption Header Field Parameters

The following parameters are used in determining the key that is used for encryption:

key:

: The "key" parameter contains the URL-safe base64 [RFC4648] bytes of the key.

keyid:

: The "keyid" parameter contains a string that identifies a key.

ecdh:

: The "ecdh" parameter contains an ephemeral elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) share.  The point
is encoding using the URL-safe base64 encoding [RFC4648].

nonce:

: The "nonce" parameter contains a base64 URL-encoded bytes of a nonce that is used to derive a
content encryption key.  The nonce value MUST be present, and MUST be exactly 16 octets long.  A
nonce cannot be reused for two different representations that have the same content encryptionkey;
generating a random nonce ensures this with a very high probability.

These parameters are used to determine a content encryption key.  The key derivation process is
described in {{derivation}}.

In addition to key determination parameters, the "bs" parameter includes a positive integer value
that describes the block size.


## Content Encryption Key Derivation {#derivation}

The content encryption key used by the content-coding is determined based on the information in the
Encryption header field.  Several variations are possible:

explicit key:

: The "key" parameter is decoded and used directly if present.  Other key determination parameters
can be ignored if this parameter is present.

identified key:

: The "keyid" is used to identify a key that is established by some out-of-band means.  A "keyid"
parameter can be omitted if a key can be identified based on other information.

ecdh:

: The ECDH share included in the "ecdh" parameter is combined with a share from the intended
recipient of the encrypted message using elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) [RFC4492] to determine
a shared secret.

: When an "ecdh" parameter is present, the "keyid" parameter identifies the key pair that the
intended recipient needs to use to recover the shared secret.  The specific curve and point format
are therefore identified by the "keyid" parameter, which identifies the key pair that the receiver
uses to decrypt the content.  Specifications that rely on this form of encryption MUST either
specify what curve and point format to use, or how a curve and point format is negotiated between
sender and receiver.


The output of each of these alternatives methods is a sequence of octets which is used as
the secret input to the TLS pseudorandom function (PRF) (as defined in Section 5 of [RFC5246])
with the SHA-256 hash function [FIPS180-2] to generate the key.

The label used for the PRF is the ASCII string "encrypted Content-Encoding" and the seed is the
value of the "nonce" parameter, which is first decoded.  The "nonce" parameter therefore MUST be
provided to enable decryption.


# Examples

## Successful GET Response

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/octet-stream
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Connection: close
Encryption: keyid="http://example.org/bob/keys/123";
            nonce="XZwpw6o37R-6qoZjw6KwAw"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

Here, a successful HTTP GET response has been encrypted using a key that is identified by a URI.

Note that the media type has been changed to "application/octet-stream" to avoid exposing
information about the content.

## Encryption and Compression

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128, gzip
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Encryption: keyid="mailto:me@example.com";
            nonce="m2hJ_NttRtFyUiMRPwfpHA"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

## Encryption with More Than One Key

~~~
PUT /thing HTTP/1.1
Host: storage.example.com
Content-Type: application/http
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128, aesgcm-128
Content-Length: 1234
Encryption: keyid="mailto:me@example.com";
            ecdh="BLiZzhckgp88pANskUpCkGV7-IFLHC-aF8MMPW7i8P...";
            nonce="NfzOeuV5USPRA-n_9s1Lag",
            keyid="http://example.org/bob/keys/123";
            nonce="bDMSGoc2uobK_IhavSHsHA"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

Here, a PUT request has been encrypted with two keys; both will be necessary to read the content.
The inner layer of encryption uses elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (the actual value is truncated).


## Encryption with Explicit Key

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 31
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Encryption: key="T9jtNY-vTvq7mSVlNFJbyw";
            nonce="nJJ-xXkP5sM_8Zp00Gp-ig"

zIZwlquLit2UEsKh1eBATJadBieZUEOI9sfiJtT6DwU
~~~

This example shows the string "I am the walrus" being encrypted.  The content body is shown here
encoded in URL-safe base64 for presentation reasons only.


## Diffie-Hellman Encryption

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 31
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Encryption: keyid="theKey";
            nonce="6hCMStcuoSdfvDjpm0qhdQ";
            ecdh="BOsUGWuTKnbckPjtsU-vCi1BQaQu5B9iEoP8No2B34r
                  SRvaA_er_d2tpRy-3e-a6n5W7MIPBcacIJ7eDWkvnDxI"

fDBJbV-a2XnWwcJQTpDinRoDqOHdmH5XxJD0Gob7wEg
~~~

This example shows the same string, "I am the walrus", encrypted using ECDH over the P-256 curve
[FIPS186]. The content body is shown here encoded in URL-safe base64 for presentation reasons only.

The receiver (in this case, the HTTP client) uses the key identified by the string "theKey" and the
sender (the server) uses a key pair for which the public share is included in the "ecdh" parameter
above. The keys shown below use uncompressed points [X.692] encoded using URL-safe base64. Line
wrapping is added for presentation purposes only.

~~~
Receiver:
  private key: iG9ObZuRssarFIh859KjDpysTMybv4HNoZoPc-1DzWo
  public key: BOsUGWuTKnbckPjtsU-vCi1BQaQu5B9iEoP8No2B34rS
              RvaA_er_d2tpRy-3e-a6n5W7MIPBcacIJ7eDWkvnDxI
Sender:
  private key: XKtP2DkzcIe5IP-F2aQEGhLyIAsFQ0_i0oerP7KhVDs
  public key: <the value of the "ecdh" parameter>
~~~


# IANA Considerations

## The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding

This memo registers the "encrypted" HTTP content-coding in the HTTP Content Codings Registry, as
detailed in {{aesgcm128}}.

* Name: aesgcm-128
* Description: AES-GCM encryption with a 128-bit key
* Reference [this specification]


## The "Encryption" HTTP header field

This memo registers the "Encryption" HTTP header field in the Permanent Message Header Registry, as
detailed in {{encryption}}.

* Field name: Encryption
* Protocol: HTTP
* Status: Standard
* Reference: [this specification]
* Notes:


## The HTTP Encryption Registry {#cipher-registry}

This memo establishes a registry for parameters used by the "Encryption" header
field under the "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Parameters" grouping.  The
"Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Encryption Parameters" operates under an
"Specification Required" policy [RFC5226].

Entries in this registry are expected to include the following information:

* Parameter Name: The name of the parameter.
* Purpose: A brief description of the purpose of the parameter.
* Reference: A reference to a specification that defines the semantics of the parameter.

The initial contents of this registry are:

### keyid

* Parameter Name: keyid
* Purpose: Identify the key that is in use.
* Reference: [this document]

### key

* Parameter Name: key
* Purpose: Provide an explicit key.
* Reference: [this document]

### ecdh

* Parameter Name: ecdh
* Purpose: Carry an elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman share used to derive a key.
* Reference: [this document]

### nonce

* Parameter Name: nonce
* Purpose: Provide a source of entropy for derivation of the content encryption key. This value is mandatory.
* Reference: [this document]

### bs

* Parameter Name: bs
* Purpose: The size of the encrypted blocks.
* Reference: [this document]


# Security Considerations

This mechanism assumes the presence of a key management framework that is used to manage the
distribution of keys between valid senders and receivers.  Defining key management is part of
composing this mechanism into a larger application, protocol, or framework.

Implementation of cryptography can be difficult.  For instance, implementations need to account for
the potential for exposing keying material on side channels, such as might be exposed by the time it
takes to perform a given operation.  The requirements for a good implementation of cryptographic
algorithms can change over time.


## Content Integrity

This mechanism does not provide any means of authenticating the origin of content.  The
authentication tag only ensures that those with access to the encryption and decryption keys can
produce valid content.


## Leaking Information in Headers

Because "encrypted" only operates upon the message payload, any information exposed in headers is
visible to anyone who can read the message.

For example, the Content-Type header can leak information about the message payload.

There are a number of strategies available to mitigate this threat, depending upon the
application's threat model and the users' tolerance for leaked information:

1. Determine that it is not an issue. For example, if it is expected that all content stored will be
"application/json", or another very common media type, exposing the Content-Type header could be an
acceptable risk.

2. If it is considered sensitive information and it is possible to determine it through other means
(e.g., out of band, using hints in other representations, etc.), omit the relevant headers, and/or
normalize them. In the case of Content-Type, this could be accomplished by always sending
Content-Type: application/octet-stream (the most generic media type).

3. If it is considered sensitive information and it is not possible to convey it elsewhere,
encapsulate the HTTP message using the application/http media type [RFC7230], encrypting that as the
payload of the "outer" message.


## Poisoning Storage

This mechanism only offers encryption of content; it does not perform authentication or
authorization, which still needs to be performed (e.g., by HTTP authentication [RFC7235]).

This is especially relevant when a HTTP PUT request is accepted by a server; if the request is
unauthenticated, it becomes possible for a third party to deny service and/or poison the store.


## Sizing and Timing Attacks

Applications using this mechanism need to be aware that the size of encrypted messages, as well as
their timing, HTTP methods, URIs and so on, may leak sensitive information.

This risk can be mitigated through the use of the padding that this mechanism provides.
Alternatively, splitting up content into segments and storing the separately might reduce
exposure. HTTP/2 [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] combined with TLS [RFC5246] might be used to hide the size
of individual messages.


--- back

Commit message:

Security considerations on key and nonce reuse

http-encryption-encoding/draft.md, after:

---
title: Encrypted Content-Encoding for HTTP
abbrev: HTTP encryption coding
docname: draft-nottingham-http-encryption-encoding-01
date: 2015
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/
 -
    ins: M. Thomson
    name: Martin Thomson
    organization: Mozilla
    email: martin.thomson@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC4492:
  RFC4648:
  RFC7230:
  RFC7231:
  AES:
    title: Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: November 2001
    seriesinfo: FIPS PUB 197
  NIST80038D:
    title: "Recommendation for Block Cipher Modes of Operation: Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) and GMAC"
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: December 2001
    seriesinfo: NIST PUB 800-38D
  FIPS180-2:
    title: NIST FIPS 180-2, Secure Hash Standard
    author:
      name: NIST
      ins: National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce
    date: 2002-08

informative:
  RFC5226:
  RFC5246:
  RFC7235:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
  FIPS186:
    title: "Digital Signature Standard (DSS)"
    author:
      - org: National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
    date: July 2013
    seriesinfo: NIST PUB 186-4
  X.692:
     title: "Public Key Cryptography For The Financial Services Industry: The Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA)"
     author:
       - org: ANSI
     seriesinfo: ANSI X9.62, 1998.

--- abstract

This memo introduces a content-coding for HTTP that allows message payloads to be encrypted.


--- middle

# Introduction

It is sometimes desirable to encrypt the contents of a HTTP message (request or response) in a
persistent manner, so that when the payload is stored (e.g., with a HTTP PUT), only someone with
the appropriate key can read it.

For example, it might be necessary to store a file on a server without exposing its contents to
that server. Furthermore, that same file could be replicated to other servers (to make it more
resistant to server or network failure), downloaded by clients (to make it available offline), etc.
without exposing its contents.

These uses are not met by the use of TLS [RFC5246], since it only encrypts the channel between the
client and server.

This document specifies a content-coding [RFC7231]) for HTTP to serve these and other use cases.

This mechanism is likely only a small part of a larger design that uses content encryption.  In
particular, this document does not describe key management practices.  How clients and servers
acquire and identify keys will depend on the use case.


## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
[RFC2119].


# The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding {#aesgcm128}

The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding indicates that a payload has been encrypted using Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) in Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) {{AES}} {{NIST80038D}}, using a 128 bit
content encryption key.

When this content-coding is in use, the Encryption header field {{encryption}} MUST be present, and
MUST include sufficient information to determine the content encryption key (see {{derivation}}).

The "aesgcm-128" content-coding uses a fixed block size for any given payload.  Each block is
followed by a 128-bit authentication tag.  The block size defaults to 4096 octets, but can be changed
using the "bs" parameter on the Encryption header field.  This block size is not to be mistaken for
the block size of the cipher.

The encrypted content is therefore a sequence of blocks, each with a length equal to the value of
the "bs" parameter, and 16 octets of authentication tag.

~~~
+-------------------------------+-----------------+
| Encrypted Content (bs octets) | Tag (16 octets) |
+-------------------------------+-----------------+
~~~

The plaintext can be of any size up to the block size.  AES-GCM does not require padding of
plaintext, so the space consumed by the ciphertext can be computed by adding the length of
the authentication tag to the bs parameter.

Each block contains between 0 and 255 bytes of padding, inserted into a block before the enciphered
content.  The length of the padding is stored in the first byte of the payload.  All padding bytes
MUST be set to zero.  It is a fatal decryption error to have a block with more padding than the
block size.

The initialization vector for each block is a 96-bit value containing the index of the current
block in network byte order.  Blocks are indexed starting at zero.

The additional data passed to the AES-GCM algorithm consists of the concatenation of:

1. the ASCII-encoded string "Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128" (with no trailing 0),
2. a zero octet, and
3. the index of the current block encoded as a 64-bit unsigned integer in network byte order.


# The "Encryption" HTTP header field  {#encryption}

The "Encryption" HTTP header field describes the encrypted content encoding(s) that have been
applied to a message payload, and therefore how those content encoding(s) can be removed.

~~~
  Encryption-val = #cipher_params
  cipher_params = [ param *( ";" param ) ]
~~~

If the payload is encrypted more than once (as reflected by having multiple content-codings that
imply encryption), each cipher is reflected in the Encryption header field, in the order in which
they were applied.

The Encryption header MAY be omitted if the sender does not intend for the immediate recipient to
be able to decrypt the message.  Alternatively, the Encryption header field MAY be omitted if the
sender intends for the recipient to acquire the header field by other means.

Servers processing PUT requests MUST persist the value of the Encryption header field, unless they
remove the content-coding by decrypting the payload.


## Encryption Header Field Parameters

The following parameters are used in determining the key that is used for encryption:

key:

: The "key" parameter contains the URL-safe base64 [RFC4648] bytes of the key.

keyid:

: The "keyid" parameter contains a string that identifies a key.

ecdh:

: The "ecdh" parameter contains an ephemeral elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) share.  The point
is encoding using the URL-safe base64 encoding [RFC4648].

nonce:

: The "nonce" parameter contains a base64 URL-encoded bytes of a nonce that is used to derive a
content encryption key.  The nonce value MUST be present, and MUST be exactly 16 octets long.  A
nonce MUST NOT be reused for two different messages that have the same content encryption key;
generating a random nonce for each message ensures that nonce reuse is highly unlikely.

These parameters are used to determine a content encryption key.  The key derivation process is
described in {{derivation}}.

In addition to key determination parameters, the "bs" parameter includes a positive integer value
that describes the block size.


## Content Encryption Key Derivation {#derivation}

The content encryption key used by the content-coding is determined based on the information in the
Encryption header field.  Several variations are possible:

explicit key:

: The "key" parameter is decoded and used directly if present.  Other key determination parameters
can be ignored if this parameter is present.

identified key:

: The "keyid" is used to identify a key that is established by some out-of-band means.  A "keyid"
parameter can be omitted if a key can be identified based on other information.

ecdh:

: The ECDH share included in the "ecdh" parameter is combined with a share from the intended
recipient of the encrypted message using elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) [RFC4492] to determine
a shared secret.

: When an "ecdh" parameter is present, the "keyid" parameter identifies the key pair that the
intended recipient needs to use to recover the shared secret.  The specific curve and point format
are therefore identified by the "keyid" parameter, which identifies the key pair that the receiver
uses to decrypt the content.  Specifications that rely on this form of encryption MUST either
specify what curve and point format to use, or how a curve and point format is negotiated between
sender and receiver.


The output of each of these alternatives methods is a sequence of octets which is used as
the secret input to the TLS pseudorandom function (PRF) (as defined in Section 5 of [RFC5246])
with the SHA-256 hash function [FIPS180-2] to generate the key.

The label used for the PRF is the ASCII string "encrypted Content-Encoding" and the seed is the
value of the "nonce" parameter, which is first decoded.  The "nonce" parameter therefore MUST be
provided to enable decryption.


# Examples

## Successful GET Response

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/octet-stream
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Connection: close
Encryption: keyid="http://example.org/bob/keys/123";
            nonce="XZwpw6o37R-6qoZjw6KwAw"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

Here, a successful HTTP GET response has been encrypted using a key that is identified by a URI.

Note that the media type has been changed to "application/octet-stream" to avoid exposing
information about the content.

## Encryption and Compression

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128, gzip
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
Encryption: keyid="mailto:me@example.com";
            nonce="m2hJ_NttRtFyUiMRPwfpHA"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

## Encryption with More Than One Key

~~~
PUT /thing HTTP/1.1
Host: storage.example.com
Content-Type: application/http
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128, aesgcm-128
Content-Length: 1234
Encryption: keyid="mailto:me@example.com";
            ecdh="BLiZzhckgp88pANskUpCkGV7-IFLHC-aF8MMPW7i8P...";
            nonce="NfzOeuV5USPRA-n_9s1Lag",
            keyid="http://example.org/bob/keys/123";
            nonce="bDMSGoc2uobK_IhavSHsHA"

[encrypted payload]
~~~

Here, a PUT request has been encrypted with two keys; both will be necessary to read the content.
The inner layer of encryption uses elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman (the actual value is truncated).


## Encryption with Explicit Key

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 31
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Encryption: key="T9jtNY-vTvq7mSVlNFJbyw";
            nonce="nJJ-xXkP5sM_8Zp00Gp-ig"

zIZwlquLit2UEsKh1eBATJadBieZUEOI9sfiJtT6DwU
~~~

This example shows the string "I am the walrus" being encrypted.  The content body is shown here
encoded in URL-safe base64 for presentation reasons only.


## Diffie-Hellman Encryption

~~~
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Length: 31
Content-Encoding: aesgcm-128
Encryption: keyid="theKey";
            nonce="6hCMStcuoSdfvDjpm0qhdQ";
            ecdh="BOsUGWuTKnbckPjtsU-vCi1BQaQu5B9iEoP8No2B34r
                  SRvaA_er_d2tpRy-3e-a6n5W7MIPBcacIJ7eDWkvnDxI"

fDBJbV-a2XnWwcJQTpDinRoDqOHdmH5XxJD0Gob7wEg
~~~

This example shows the same string, "I am the walrus", encrypted using ECDH over the P-256 curve
[FIPS186]. The content body is shown here encoded in URL-safe base64 for presentation reasons only.

The receiver (in this case, the HTTP client) uses the key identified by the string "theKey" and the
sender (the server) uses a key pair for which the public share is included in the "ecdh" parameter
above. The keys shown below use uncompressed points [X.692] encoded using URL-safe base64. Line
wrapping is added for presentation purposes only.

~~~
Receiver:
  private key: iG9ObZuRssarFIh859KjDpysTMybv4HNoZoPc-1DzWo
  public key: BOsUGWuTKnbckPjtsU-vCi1BQaQu5B9iEoP8No2B34rS
              RvaA_er_d2tpRy-3e-a6n5W7MIPBcacIJ7eDWkvnDxI
Sender:
  private key: XKtP2DkzcIe5IP-F2aQEGhLyIAsFQ0_i0oerP7KhVDs
  public key: <the value of the "ecdh" parameter>
~~~


# IANA Considerations

## The "aesgcm-128" HTTP content-coding

This memo registers the "encrypted" HTTP content-coding in the HTTP Content Codings Registry, as
detailed in {{aesgcm128}}.

* Name: aesgcm-128
* Description: AES-GCM encryption with a 128-bit key
* Reference [this specification]


## The "Encryption" HTTP header field

This memo registers the "Encryption" HTTP header field in the Permanent Message Header Registry, as
detailed in {{encryption}}.

* Field name: Encryption
* Protocol: HTTP
* Status: Standard
* Reference: [this specification]
* Notes:


## The HTTP Encryption Registry {#cipher-registry}

This memo establishes a registry for parameters used by the "Encryption" header
field under the "Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Parameters" grouping.  The
"Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Encryption Parameters" operates under an
"Specification Required" policy [RFC5226].

Entries in this registry are expected to include the following information:

* Parameter Name: The name of the parameter.
* Purpose: A brief description of the purpose of the parameter.
* Reference: A reference to a specification that defines the semantics of the parameter.

The initial contents of this registry are:

### keyid

* Parameter Name: keyid
* Purpose: Identify the key that is in use.
* Reference: [this document]

### key

* Parameter Name: key
* Purpose: Provide an explicit key.
* Reference: [this document]

### ecdh

* Parameter Name: ecdh
* Purpose: Carry an elliptic curve Diffie-Hellman share used to derive a key.
* Reference: [this document]

### nonce

* Parameter Name: nonce
* Purpose: Provide a source of entropy for derivation of the content encryption key. This value is mandatory.
* Reference: [this document]

### bs

* Parameter Name: bs
* Purpose: The size of the encrypted blocks.
* Reference: [this document]


# Security Considerations

This mechanism assumes the presence of a key management framework that is used to manage the
distribution of keys between valid senders and receivers.  Defining key management is part of
composing this mechanism into a larger application, protocol, or framework.

Implementation of cryptography can be difficult.  For instance, implementations need to account for
the potential for exposing keying material on side channels, such as might be exposed by the time it
takes to perform a given operation.  The requirements for a good implementation of cryptographic
algorithms can change over time.


## Key and Nonce Reuse

Encrypting different plaintext with the same content encryption key and initialization vector in
AES-GCM is not safe.  The scheme defined here relies on the uniqueness of the nonce to ensure that
the content encryption key is different for every message.

If a key and nonce are reused, this could expose the content encryption key.  If the same key is
used for multiple messages, then the nonce MUST be unique for each.  An implementation SHOULD
generate a random nonce for every message, though using a counter for the nonce could achieve the
desired result.


## Content Integrity

This mechanism does not provide any means of authenticating the origin of content.  The
authentication tag only ensures that those with access to the encryption and decryption keys can
produce valid content.


## Leaking Information in Headers

Because "encrypted" only operates upon the message payload, any information exposed in headers is
visible to anyone who can read the message.

For example, the Content-Type header can leak information about the message payload.

There are a number of strategies available to mitigate this threat, depending upon the
application's threat model and the users' tolerance for leaked information:

1. Determine that it is not an issue. For example, if it is expected that all content stored will be
"application/json", or another very common media type, exposing the Content-Type header could be an
acceptable risk.

2. If it is considered sensitive information and it is possible to determine it through other means
(e.g., out of band, using hints in other representations, etc.), omit the relevant headers, and/or
normalize them. In the case of Content-Type, this could be accomplished by always sending
Content-Type: application/octet-stream (the most generic media type).

3. If it is considered sensitive information and it is not possible to convey it elsewhere,
encapsulate the HTTP message using the application/http media type [RFC7230], encrypting that as the
payload of the "outer" message.


## Poisoning Storage

This mechanism only offers encryption of content; it does not perform authentication or
authorization, which still needs to be performed (e.g., by HTTP authentication [RFC7235]).

This is especially relevant when a HTTP PUT request is accepted by a server; if the request is
unauthenticated, it becomes possible for a third party to deny service and/or poison the store.


## Sizing and Timing Attacks

Applications using this mechanism need to be aware that the size of encrypted messages, as well as
their timing, HTTP methods, URIs and so on, may leak sensitive information.

This risk can be mitigated through the use of the padding that this mechanism provides.
Alternatively, splitting up content into segments and storing the separately might reduce
exposure. HTTP/2 [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] combined with TLS [RFC5246] might be used to hide the size
of individual messages.


--- back
