http2-encryption/draft.md, before:

---
title: Opportunistic Encryption for HTTP URIs
abbrev: Opportunistic HTTP Encryption
docname: draft-nottingham-http2-encryption-02
date: 2013
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC2818:
  RFC5246:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
  I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc:
  I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg:

informative:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  firesheep:
    target: http://codebutler.com/firesheep/
    title: Firesheep
    author:
      ins: E. Butler
      name: Eric Butler
    date: 2010
  streetview:
    target: http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/05/google-wifi-fcc-investigation/
    title: The Anatomy of Google's Wi-Fi Sniffing Debacle
    author:
      ins: D. Kravets
      name: David Kravets
      organization: Wired
    date: 2012
  xkeyscore:
    target: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/31/nsa-top-secret-program-online-data
    title: NSA tool collects 'nearly everything a user does on the internet'
    author:
      ins: G. Greenwald
      name: Glenn Greenwald
      organization: The Guardian
    date: 2013
  I-D.mbelshe-httpbis-spdy:
  RFC2804:
  RFC3365:
  RFC6246:
  RFC6973:


--- abstract

This document proposes a way to opportunistically encrypt HTTP/2.0 using TLS
for HTTP URIs.

--- middle

# Introduction

In discussion at IETF87, it was proposed that the current means of
bootstrapping encryption in HTTP {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}} -- using the
"HTTPS" URI scheme -- unintentionally gives the server disproportionate power
in determining whether encryption (through use of TLS {{RFC6246}}) is used.

This document uses the new "alternate services" layer described in
{{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}} to decouple the URI scheme from the use and
configuration of underlying encryption, allowing a "http://" URI to be upgraded
to use TLS opportunistically.

Additionally, because using TLS requires acquiring and configuring a valid
certificate, some deployments may find supporting it difficult. Therefore, this
document also proposes a "relaxed" profile of HTTP/2.0 over TLS that does not
require strong server authentication, specifically for use with "http://" URIs.


## Goals and Non-Goals

The immediate goal is to make HTTP URIs more robust in the face of passive
monitoring.

Such passive attacks are often opportunistic; they rely on sensitive
information being available in the clear. Furthermore, they are often broad,
where all available data is collected en masse, being analyzed separately for
relevant information.

It is not a goal of this document to address active or targeted attacks,
although future solutions may be complementary.

Other goals include ease of implementation and deployment, with minimal impact
upon performance (in keeping with the goals of HTTP/2.0).

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


# Indicating Security Properties in Protocol Identifiers

In past dicussions, there has been general agreement to reusing the ALPN
protocol identifier {{I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg}} for all negotiation
mechanisms in HTTP/2.0, not just TLS.

This document proposes putting additional information into them to identify the
use of encryption as well as configuration of that encryption, independent of
the URI scheme in use.

Thus, we won't have just one protocol identifier for HTTP/2.0, but two; one
with and one without the use of TLS. For example, the following identifiers
might be registered if this approach is adopted:

* http1 - http/1.x over TCP
* http1-tls - http/1.x over TLS over TCP (as per {{RFC2818}})
* http2 - http/2.x over TCP
* http2-tls - http/2.x over TLS over TCP (as per {{RFC2818}})
* http2-tls-relaxed - http/2.x over TLS over TCP (see {{relaxed}})

Most of these are already latently defined by HTTP/2.0, with the exception
being http2-tls-relaxed, defined below. Note that the focus of this proposal is
on the semantics of the identifiers; an exact syntax for them is not part of it.

By indicating the use of TLS in the protocol identifier allows a client and
server to negotiate the use of TLS for "http://" URIs; if the server offers
http2-tls, the client can select that protocol, start TLS and use it.

Note that, as discussed in {{downgrade}}, there may be situations (e.g,. ALPN)
where advertising some of these profiles are inapplicable or inadvisable. For
example, in an ALPN negotiation for a "https://" URI, it is only sensible to
offer http1-tls and http2-tls.


## The "http2-tls-relaxed" Protocol {#relaxed}

Servers that support the "http2-tls-relaxed" protocol indicate that they
support TLS for access to URIs with the "http" URI scheme using HTTP/2.0 or
greater.

Servers MAY advertise the "http2-tls-relaxed" profile for resources with a
"http" origin scheme; they MUST NOT advertise it for resources with a "https"
origin.

When a client connects to an "http2-tls-relaxed" alternate service, it MUST use
TLS1.1 or greater, and MUST use HTTP/2.x. HTTP/2.0 SHOULD be used as
soon as TLS negotiation is completed; i.e., the "Upgrade dance" SHOULD NOT be
performed.

When connecting to an "http2-tls-relaxed" service, the algorithm for
authenticating the server described in {{RFC2818}} Section 3.1 changes; the
client does not necessarily validate its certificate for expiry, hostname match
or relationship to a known certificate authority (as it would with "normal"
HTTPS).

However, the client MAY perform additional checks on the certificate and make a
decision as to its validity before using the server. Definition of such
additional checks are out of scope for this specification.

Upon initial adoption of this proposal, it is expected that no such additional
checks will be performed. Therefore, the client MUST NOT use the
"http2-tls-relaxed" profile to connect to alternate services whose host does
not match that of the origin (as per {{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}}), unless additional checks are performed.

Servers SHOULD use the same certificate consistently over time, to aid future
extensions for building trust and adding other services.

[TODO: define "same"; likely not the same actual certificate. ]

When the http2-tls-relaxed protocol is in use, User Agents MUST NOT indicate
the connection has the same level of security as https:// (e.g. using a "lock
device").


# Security Considerations

## Downgrade Attacks {#downgrade}

A downgrade attack against the negotation for TLS is possible, depending upon
the properties of the negotiation mechanism.

For example, because the Alt-Svc header field {{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}}
appears in the clear for "http://" URIs, it is subject to downgrade by
attackers that are able to Man-in-the-Middle the network connection; in its
simplest form, an attacker that wants the connection to remain in the clear
need only strip the Alt-Svc header from responses.

This proposal does not offer a remedy for this risk. However, it's important to
note that it is no worse than current use of unencrypted HTTP in the face of
such active attacks. 

Future proposals might attempt to address this risk.


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Patrick McManus, Eliot Lear, Stephen Farrell, Guy Podjarny, Stephen
Ludin, Erik Nygren, Paul Hoffman and Adam Langley for their feedback and
suggestions.


# Recent History and Background

One of the design goals for SPDY {{I-D.mbelshe-httpbis-spdy}} was increasing
the use of encryption on the Web, achieved by only supporting the protocol over
a connection protected by TLS {{RFC5246}}.

This was done, in part, because sensitive information -- including not only
login credentials, but also personally identifying information (PII) and even
patterns of access -- are increasingly prevalent on the Web, being evident in
potentially every HTTP request made. 

Attacks such as FireSheep {{firesheep}} showed how easy it is to gather such
information when it is sent in the clear, and incidents such as Google's
collection of unencrypted data by its StreetView Cars {{streetview}} further
illustrated the risks.

In adopting SPDY as the basis of HTTP/2 {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2}}, the HTTPbis
Working Group agreed not to make TLS mandatory to implement (MtI) or mandatory
to use (MtU) in our charter, despite an IETF policy to prefer the "best
security available" {{RFC3365}}.

There were a variety of reasons for this, but most significantly, HTTP is used
for much more than the traditional browsing case, and encryption is not needed
for all of these uses. Making encryption MtU or MtI was seen as unlikely to
succeed because of the wide deployment of HTTP URIs.

However, since making that decision, there have been developments that
have caused the Working Group to discuss these issues again:

1. Active contributors to some browser implementations have stated that their
products will not use HTTP/2 over unencrypted connections. If this eventuates,
it will prevent wide deployment of the new protocol (i.e., it couldn't be used
with those products for HTTP URIs; only HTTPS URIs).

2. It has been reported that surveillance of HTTP traffic takes place on a
broad scale {{xkeyscore}}. While the IETF does not take a formal, moral
position on wiretapping, we do have a strongly held belief "that both
commercial development of the Internet and adequate privacy for its users
against illegal intrusion requires the wide availability of strong
cryptographic technology" {{RFC2804}}. This requirement for privacy is further
reinforced by {{RFC6973}}.

As a result, we decided to revisit the issue of how encryption is used in
HTTP/2.0 at IETF87.
  
  
# Frequently Asked Questions

## Will this make encryption mandatory in HTTP/2.0?

Not in the sense that this proposal would have it required (with a MUST) in the
specification.

What might happen, however, is that some browser implementers will take the
flexibility that this approach grants and decide to not negotiate for HTTP/2.0
without one of the encryption profiles. That means that servers would need to
implement one of the encryption-enabling profiles to interoperate using
HTTP/2.0 for HTTP URIs.


## No certificate checks? Really?

http2-tls-relaxed has the effect of relaxing certificate checks on "http://" -
but not "https://" - URIs when TLS is in use. Since TLS isn't in use for any
"http://" URIs today, there is no net loss of security, and we gain some
privacy from passive attacks.

This makes TLS signficantly simpler to deploy for servers; they are able to use
a self-signed certificate. 

Additionally, it is possible to detect some attacks by remembering what
certificate is used in the past "pinning" or third-party verification of the
certificate in use. This may offer a way to gain stronger authentication of the
origin server's identity, and mitigate downgrade attacks (although doing so is
out of the scope of this document).


## Why do this if a downgrade attack is so easy?

There are many attack scenarios (e.g., third parties in coffee shops) where
active attacks are not feasible, or much more difficult. 

Additionally, active attacks can often be detected, because they change
protocol interactions; as such, they bring a risk of discovery.


## Why Have separate relaxed protocol identifiers?

If all implementations agree that using TLS for "http://" URIs always means that
the certificate checks are "relaxed", it could be that there is no need for a 
separate protocol identifier. However, this needs to be discussed.

Commit message:

make firm recommendations for protocol identifiers, mention draft identifiers.

http2-encryption/draft.md, after:

---
title: Opportunistic Encryption for HTTP URIs
abbrev: Opportunistic HTTP Encryption
docname: draft-nottingham-http2-encryption-02
date: 2013
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup: 
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization: 
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC2818:
  RFC5246:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2:
  I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc:
  I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg:

informative:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  firesheep:
    target: http://codebutler.com/firesheep/
    title: Firesheep
    author:
      ins: E. Butler
      name: Eric Butler
    date: 2010
  streetview:
    target: http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/05/google-wifi-fcc-investigation/
    title: The Anatomy of Google's Wi-Fi Sniffing Debacle
    author:
      ins: D. Kravets
      name: David Kravets
      organization: Wired
    date: 2012
  xkeyscore:
    target: http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/31/nsa-top-secret-program-online-data
    title: NSA tool collects 'nearly everything a user does on the internet'
    author:
      ins: G. Greenwald
      name: Glenn Greenwald
      organization: The Guardian
    date: 2013
  I-D.mbelshe-httpbis-spdy:
  RFC2804:
  RFC3365:
  RFC6246:
  RFC6973:


--- abstract

This document proposes a way to opportunistically encrypt HTTP/2.0 using TLS
for HTTP URIs.

--- middle

# Introduction

In discussion at IETF87, it was proposed that the current means of
bootstrapping encryption in HTTP {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}} -- using the
"HTTPS" URI scheme -- unintentionally gives the server disproportionate power
in determining whether encryption (through use of TLS {{RFC6246}}) is used.

This document uses the new "alternate services" layer described in
{{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}} to decouple the URI scheme from the use and
configuration of underlying encryption, allowing a "http://" URI to be upgraded
to use TLS opportunistically.

Additionally, because using TLS requires acquiring and configuring a valid
certificate, some deployments may find supporting it difficult. Therefore, this
document also proposes a "relaxed" profile of HTTP/2.0 over TLS that does not
require strong server authentication, specifically for use with "http://" URIs.


## Goals and Non-Goals

The immediate goal is to make HTTP URIs more robust in the face of passive
monitoring.

Such passive attacks are often opportunistic; they rely on sensitive
information being available in the clear. Furthermore, they are often broad,
where all available data is collected en masse, being analyzed separately for
relevant information.

It is not a goal of this document to address active or targeted attacks,
although future solutions may be complementary.

Other goals include ease of implementation and deployment, with minimal impact
upon performance (in keeping with the goals of HTTP/2.0).

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


# Indicating Security Properties in Protocol Identifiers

In past dicussions, there has been general agreement to reusing the ALPN
protocol identifier {{I-D.ietf-tls-applayerprotoneg}} for all negotiation
mechanisms in HTTP/2.0, not just TLS.

This document proposes putting additional information into them to identify the
use of encryption as well as configuration of that encryption, independent of
the URI scheme in use.

Thus, we won't have just one protocol identifier for HTTP/2.0, but two; one
with and one without the use of TLS. As such, the following identifiers
are recommended if this approach is adopted:

* h1 - http/1.x over TCP
* h1t - http/1.x over TLS over TCP (as per {{RFC2818}})
* h2 - http/2.x over TCP
* h2t - http/2.x over TLS over TCP (as per {{RFC2818}})
* h2r - http/2.x over TLS over TCP (see {{relaxed}})

Draft implementations could be indicated with a suffix; e.g., h2t-draft10.

Most of these are already latently defined by HTTP/2.0, with the exception
being h2r, defined below. Note that the focus of this proposal is
on the semantics of the identifiers; an exact syntax for them is not part of it.

By indicating the use of TLS in the protocol identifier allows a client and
server to negotiate the use of TLS for "http://" URIs; if the server offers
h2t, the client can select that protocol, start TLS and use it.

Note that, as discussed in {{downgrade}}, there may be situations (e.g,. ALPN)
where advertising some of these profiles are inapplicable or inadvisable. For
example, in an ALPN negotiation for a "https://" URI, it is only sensible to
offer h1t and h2t.


## The "h2r" Protocol {#relaxed}

Servers that support the "h2r" protocol indicate that they
support TLS for access to URIs with the "http" URI scheme using HTTP/2.0 or
greater.

Servers MAY advertise the "h2r" profile for resources with a
"http" origin scheme; they MUST NOT advertise it for resources with a "https"
origin.

When a client connects to an "h2r" alternate service, it MUST use
TLS1.1 or greater, and MUST use HTTP/2.x. HTTP/2.0 SHOULD be used as
soon as TLS negotiation is completed; i.e., the "Upgrade dance" SHOULD NOT be
performed.

When connecting to an "h2r" service, the algorithm for
authenticating the server described in {{RFC2818}} Section 3.1 changes; the
client does not necessarily validate its certificate for expiry, hostname match
or relationship to a known certificate authority (as it would with "normal"
HTTPS).

However, the client MAY perform additional checks on the certificate and make a
decision as to its validity before using the server. Definition of such
additional checks are out of scope for this specification.

Upon initial adoption of this proposal, it is expected that no such additional
checks will be performed. Therefore, the client MUST NOT use the
"h2r" profile to connect to alternate services whose host does
not match that of the origin (as per {{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}}), unless additional checks are performed.

Servers SHOULD use the same certificate consistently over time, to aid future
extensions for building trust and adding other services.

[TODO: define "same"; likely not the same actual certificate. ]

When the h2r protocol is in use, User Agents MUST NOT indicate
the connection has the same level of security as https:// (e.g. using a "lock
device").


# Security Considerations

## Downgrade Attacks {#downgrade}

A downgrade attack against the negotation for TLS is possible, depending upon
the properties of the negotiation mechanism.

For example, because the Alt-Svc header field {{I-D.nottingham-httpbis-alt-svc}}
appears in the clear for "http://" URIs, it is subject to downgrade by
attackers that are able to Man-in-the-Middle the network connection; in its
simplest form, an attacker that wants the connection to remain in the clear
need only strip the Alt-Svc header from responses.

This proposal does not offer a remedy for this risk. However, it's important to
note that it is no worse than current use of unencrypted HTTP in the face of
such active attacks. 

Future proposals might attempt to address this risk.


--- back

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Patrick McManus, Eliot Lear, Stephen Farrell, Guy Podjarny, Stephen
Ludin, Erik Nygren, Paul Hoffman and Adam Langley for their feedback and
suggestions.


# Recent History and Background

One of the design goals for SPDY {{I-D.mbelshe-httpbis-spdy}} was increasing
the use of encryption on the Web, achieved by only supporting the protocol over
a connection protected by TLS {{RFC5246}}.

This was done, in part, because sensitive information -- including not only
login credentials, but also personally identifying information (PII) and even
patterns of access -- are increasingly prevalent on the Web, being evident in
potentially every HTTP request made. 

Attacks such as FireSheep {{firesheep}} showed how easy it is to gather such
information when it is sent in the clear, and incidents such as Google's
collection of unencrypted data by its StreetView Cars {{streetview}} further
illustrated the risks.

In adopting SPDY as the basis of HTTP/2 {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2}}, the HTTPbis
Working Group agreed not to make TLS mandatory to implement (MtI) or mandatory
to use (MtU) in our charter, despite an IETF policy to prefer the "best
security available" {{RFC3365}}.

There were a variety of reasons for this, but most significantly, HTTP is used
for much more than the traditional browsing case, and encryption is not needed
for all of these uses. Making encryption MtU or MtI was seen as unlikely to
succeed because of the wide deployment of HTTP URIs.

However, since making that decision, there have been developments that
have caused the Working Group to discuss these issues again:

1. Active contributors to some browser implementations have stated that their
products will not use HTTP/2 over unencrypted connections. If this eventuates,
it will prevent wide deployment of the new protocol (i.e., it couldn't be used
with those products for HTTP URIs; only HTTPS URIs).

2. It has been reported that surveillance of HTTP traffic takes place on a
broad scale {{xkeyscore}}. While the IETF does not take a formal, moral
position on wiretapping, we do have a strongly held belief "that both
commercial development of the Internet and adequate privacy for its users
against illegal intrusion requires the wide availability of strong
cryptographic technology" {{RFC2804}}. This requirement for privacy is further
reinforced by {{RFC6973}}.

As a result, we decided to revisit the issue of how encryption is used in
HTTP/2.0 at IETF87.
  
  
# Frequently Asked Questions

## Will this make encryption mandatory in HTTP/2.0?

Not in the sense that this proposal would have it required (with a MUST) in the
specification.

What might happen, however, is that some browser implementers will take the
flexibility that this approach grants and decide to not negotiate for HTTP/2.0
without one of the encryption profiles. That means that servers would need to
implement one of the encryption-enabling profiles to interoperate using
HTTP/2.0 for HTTP URIs.


## No certificate checks? Really?

h2r has the effect of relaxing certificate checks on "http://" -
but not "https://" - URIs when TLS is in use. Since TLS isn't in use for any
"http://" URIs today, there is no net loss of security, and we gain some
privacy from passive attacks.

This makes TLS signficantly simpler to deploy for servers; they are able to use
a self-signed certificate. 

Additionally, it is possible to detect some attacks by remembering what
certificate is used in the past "pinning" or third-party verification of the
certificate in use. This may offer a way to gain stronger authentication of the
origin server's identity, and mitigate downgrade attacks (although doing so is
out of the scope of this document).


## Why do this if a downgrade attack is so easy?

There are many attack scenarios (e.g., third parties in coffee shops) where
active attacks are not feasible, or much more difficult. 

Additionally, active attacks can often be detected, because they change
protocol interactions; as such, they bring a risk of discovery.


## Why Have separate relaxed protocol identifiers?

If all implementations agree that using TLS for "http://" URIs always means that
the certificate checks are "relaxed", it could be that there is no need for a 
separate protocol identifier. However, this needs to be discussed.
