link-hint/draft.md, before:

---
title: HTTP Link Hints
abbrev:
docname: draft-nottingham-link-hint-00
date: 2013
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC4627:
  RFC5226:
  RFC5988:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache:

informative:
  RFC5789:
  RFC6585:
  RFC6906:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p4-conditional:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p5-range:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth:
  I-D.snell-http-prefer:
  apps-discuss:
    target: https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/apps-discuss
    title: IETF Apps-Discuss Mailing List
    author:
      - organization: IETF

--- abstract

This memo specifies "HTTP Link Hints", a mechanism for annotating Web links to
HTTP(S) resources with information that otherwise might be discovered by
interacting with them.

--- note_Note_to_Readers

This draft should be discussed on the apps-discuss mailing list; see
{{apps-discuss}}.

--- middle

Introduction
============

Clients can discover a variety of information about a HTTP
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}} resource by interacting with it. For
example, the methods supported can be learned through the Allow response header
field, whereas the need for authentication is conveyed with a 401
Authentication Required status code.

In some situations, it can be beneficial to know this information before
interacting with the resource; not only can it save time (through reduced round
trips), but it can also affect the choices given to the code or user driving
the interaction.

For example, a user interface that presents the data from an HTTP-based API
might need to know which resources the user has write access to, so that it can
present the appropriate interface.

This specification defines a vocabulary of "HTTP link hints" that allow such
metadata about HTTP resources to be attached to Web links {{RFC5988}}, thereby
making it available before the link is followed. It also establishes a registry
for future hints.

Hints are just that -- they are not a "contract", and are to only be taken as
advisory. The runtime behaviour of the resource always overrides hinted
information.

For example, a client might receive a hint that the PUT method is allowed on
all "widget" resources. This means that generally, the client can PUT to them,
but a specific resource might reject a PUT based upon access control or other
considerations. 

More fine-grained information might be gathered by interacting with the
resource (e.g., via a GET), or by another resource "containing" it (such as a
"widgets" collection) or describing it (e.g., one linked to it with a
"describedby" link relation).


Notational Conventions
----------------------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


HTTP Link Hints {#link_hints}
===============

A HTTP link hint is a (key, value) tuple that describes the target resource of
a Web link {{RFC5988}}, or the link itself. The value's canonical form is a
JSON {{RFC4627}} data structure, whose form is defined by the hint's
definition. 

Typically, they are serialised in links as target attributes.

In JSON-based formats, this can be achieved by simply serialising link hints as
an object; for example:

~~~
{
  "_links": {
    "self": {
      "href": "/orders/523",
       "hints": {
        "allow": ["GET", "POST"],
        "accept-post": {
          "application/example+json":
            {}
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
~~~

In other link formats, this requires a mapping from the canonical JSON data
model. One such mapping for the Link HTTP header is described in
{{link_header}}.

The information in a link hint SHOULD NOT be considered valid for longer than
the freshness lifetime ({{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache}}) of the representation
that the link occurred within, and in some cases, it might be valid for a
considerably shorter period.

Likewise, the information in a link hint is specific to the link it is attached
to. This means that if a representation is specific to a particular user, the
hints on links in that representation are also specific to that user.


Pre-Defined HTTP Link Hints {#hints}
===========================

allow
-----

* Hint Name: allow
* Description: Hints the HTTP methods that can be used to interact with the
  target resource; equivalent to the Allow HTTP response header.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing HTTP methods.

formats
-------

* Hint Name: formats
* Description: Hints the representation type(s) that the target resource can
  produce and consume, using the GET and PUT (if allowed) methods respectively.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an object, whose keys are media types, and values are objects.

The object MAY have a "links" member, whose value is an object representing
links (in the sense of {{RFC5988}}) whose context is any document that uses
that format. Generally, this will be schema or profile ({{RFC6906}})
information. The "links" member has the same format as the "links" hint.

Furthermore, the object MAY have a "deprecated" member, whose value is either
true or false, indicating whether support for the format might be removed in
the near future.

All other members of the object are under control of the corresponding media
type's definition.

links
-----

* Hint Name: links
* Description: Hints at links whose context is the target resource.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

The "links" hint contains links (in the sense of {{RFC5988}}) whose context is
the hinted target resource, which are stable for the lifetime of the hint.

Content MUST be an object, whose member names are link relations ({{RFC5988}})
and values are objects that MUST have an "href" member whose value is a
URI-reference ({{RFC3986}}, using the original link as the base for resolution)
for the link hint's target resource, and MAY itself contain link hints,
serialised as the value for a "hints" member.

For example:

~~~
"links": {
  "edit-form": {
    "href": "./edit",
    "hints": {
      formats: {
        "application/json": {}
      }
    }
  }
}
~~~

accept-post
-----------

* Hint Name: accept-post
* Description: Hints the POST request format(s) that the target resource can
  consume.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an object, with the same constraints as for "formats".

When this hint is present, "POST" SHOULD be listed in the "allow" hint.

accept-patch
------------

* Hint Name: accept-patch
* Description: Hints the PATCH {{RFC5789}} request format(s) that the target
  resource can consume; equivalent to the Accept-Patch HTTP response header.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing media types. Note that there is
no opportunity to communicate format-specific hints for PATCH formats.

When this hint is present, "PATCH" SHOULD be listed in the "allow" hint.

accept-ranges
-------------

* Hint Name: accept-ranges
* Description: Hints the range-specifier(s) available for the target resource;
  equivalent to the Accept-Ranges HTTP response header
  {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p5-range}}.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing HTTP range-specifiers.

accept-prefer
-------------

* Hint Name: accept-prefer
* Description: Hints the preference(s) {{I-D.snell-http-prefer}} that the
  target resource understands (and might act upon) in requests.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, contain preferences. Note that, by its
nature, a preference can be ignored by the server.

precondition-req
----------------

* Hint Name: precondition-req
* Description: Hints that the target resource requires state-changing requests
  (e.g., PUT, PATCH) to include a precondition, as per
  {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p4-conditional}}, to avoid conflicts due to concurrent
  updates.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, with possible values "etag" and
"last-modified" indicating type of precondition expected.

See also the 428 Precondition Required status code ({{RFC6585}}).

auth-schemes
------------

* Hint Name: auth-schemes
* Description: Hints that the target resource requires authentication using the
  HTTP Authentication Framework {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth}}.
* Content Model: array (of objects)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of objects, each with a "scheme" member containing
a string that corresponds to a HTTP authentication scheme, and optionally a
"realms" member containing an array of zero to many strings that identify
protection spaces that the resource is a member of.

For example:

~~~
  {
    "auth-req": [
      {
        "scheme": "Basic",
        "realms": ["private"]
      }
    ]
  }
~~~

status
------

* Hint Name: status
* Description: Hints the status of the target resource.
* Content Model: string
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be a string; possible values are:

* "deprecated" - indicates that use of the resource is not recommended, but it
  is still available.
* "gone" - indicates that the resource is no longer available; i.e., it will
  return a 410 Gone HTTP status code if accessed.



Security Considerations
=======================

Clients need to exercise care when using hints. For example, a naive client
might send credentials to a server that uses the auth-req hint, without
checking to see if those credentials are appropriate for that server.


IANA Considerations
===================

HTTP Link Hint Registry {#hint_registry}
-----------------------

This specification defines the HTTP Link Hint Registry. See {{link_hints}}
for a general description of the function of link hints.

Link hints are generic; that is, they are potentially applicable to any HTTP
resource, not specific to one application of HTTP, nor to one particular
format. Generally, they ought to be information that would otherwise be
discoverable by interacting with the resource.

Hint names MUST be composed of the lowercase letters (a-z), digits (0-9),
underscores ("_") and hyphens ("-"), and MUST begin with a lowercase letter.

Hint content MUST be described in terms of JSON values ({{RFC4627}}, Section
2.1).

Hint semantics SHOULD be described in terms of the framework defined in
{{RFC5988}}.

New hints are registered using the Expert Review process described in
{{RFC5226}} to enforce the criteria above. Requests for registration of new
resource hints are to use the following template:

* Hint Name: [hint name]
* Description: [a short description of the hint's semantics]
* Content Model: [valid JSON value types; see RFC627 Section 2.1]
* Specification: [reference to specification document]

Initial registrations are enumerated in {{hints}}. The "rel", "rev",
"hreflang", "media", "title", and "type" hint names are reserved, so as to
avoid potential clashes with link serialisations.


--- back

Representing Link Hints in Link Headers {#link_header}
=======================================

A link hint can be represented in a Link header ({{RFC5988}}, Section 5) as a
link-extension.

When doing so, the JSON of the hint's content SHOULD be normalised to reduce
extraneous spaces (%x20), and MUST NOT contain horizontal tabs (%x09), line
feeds (%x0A) or carriage returns (%x0D). When they are part of a string value,
these characters MUST be escaped as described in {{RFC4627}} Section 2.5;
otherwise, they MUST be discarded.

Furthermore, if the content is an array or an object, the surrounding
delimiters MUST be removed before serialisation. In other words, the outermost
object or array is represented without the braces ("{}") or brackets ("[]")
respectively, but this does not apply to inner objects or arrays.


For example, the two JSON values below are those of the fictitious "example" and "exmaple1" hints, respectively:

~~~
"The Example Value"
1.2
~~~

In a Link header, they would be serialised as:

~~~
Link: </>; rel="sample"; example="The Example Value";
      example1=1.2
~~~

A more complex, single value for "example":

~~~
[
  "foo",
  -1.23,
  true,
  ["charlie", "bennet"],
  {"cat": "thor"},
  false
]
~~~

would be serialised as:

~~~
Link: </>; rel="sample"; example="\"foo\", -1.23, true,
      [\"charlie\", \"bennet\"], {"cat": \"thor\"}, false"
~~



Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Jan Algermissen, Mike Amundsen, Bill Burke, Graham Klyne, Leif
Hedstrom, Jeni Tennison, Erik Wilde and Jorge Williams for their suggestions
and feedback.

Open Issues
===========

The following is a list of placeholders for open issues.

* Resource Hints
  * indicate a POST to 201 Created pattern
  * indicate an "action" POST
  * outbound links
  * forms?
* Representation Hints
  * format profiles
  * schema?
  * deprecation

Commit message:

mention that we don't recommend any one format

link-hint/draft.md, after:

---
title: HTTP Link Hints
abbrev:
docname: draft-nottingham-link-hint-00
date: 2013
category: info

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, tocindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: M. Nottingham
    name: Mark Nottingham
    organization:
    email: mnot@mnot.net
    uri: http://www.mnot.net/

normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3986:
  RFC4627:
  RFC5226:
  RFC5988:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache:

informative:
  RFC5789:
  RFC6585:
  RFC6906:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p4-conditional:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p5-range:
  I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth:
  I-D.snell-http-prefer:
  apps-discuss:
    target: https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/apps-discuss
    title: IETF Apps-Discuss Mailing List
    author:
      - organization: IETF

--- abstract

This memo specifies "HTTP Link Hints", a mechanism for annotating Web links to
HTTP(S) resources with information that otherwise might be discovered by
interacting with them.

--- note_Note_to_Readers

This draft should be discussed on the apps-discuss mailing list; see
{{apps-discuss}}.

--- middle

Introduction
============

Clients can discover a variety of information about a HTTP
{{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p1-messaging}} resource by interacting with it. For
example, the methods supported can be learned through the Allow response header
field, whereas the need for authentication is conveyed with a 401
Authentication Required status code.

In some situations, it can be beneficial to know this information before
interacting with the resource; not only can it save time (through reduced round
trips), but it can also affect the choices given to the code or user driving
the interaction.

For example, a user interface that presents the data from an HTTP-based API
might need to know which resources the user has write access to, so that it can
present the appropriate interface.

This specification defines a vocabulary of "HTTP link hints" that allow such
metadata about HTTP resources to be attached to Web links {{RFC5988}}, thereby
making it available before the link is followed. It also establishes a registry
for future hints.

It does not recommend a single serialisation format for link hints; rather, it
is expected that this will be done by individual link serialisations that use
hints (whether they be in a representation body, message headers or elsewhere). However, {{link_header}} does recommend how to include link hints in the
existing Link HTTP header field.

Hints are just that -- they are not a "contract", and are to only be taken as
advisory. The runtime behaviour of the resource always overrides hinted
information.

For example, a client might receive a hint that the PUT method is allowed on
all "widget" resources. This means that generally, the client can PUT to them,
but a specific resource might reject a PUT based upon access control or other
considerations. 

More fine-grained information might be gathered by interacting with the
resource (e.g., via a GET), or by another resource "containing" it (such as a
"widgets" collection) or describing it (e.g., one linked to it with a
"describedby" link relation).


Notational Conventions
----------------------

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


HTTP Link Hints {#link_hints}
===============

A HTTP link hint is a (key, value) tuple that describes the target resource of
a Web link {{RFC5988}}, or the link itself. The value's canonical form is a
JSON {{RFC4627}} data structure, whose form is defined by the hint's
definition. 

Typically, they are serialised in links as target attributes.

In JSON-based formats, this can be achieved by simply serialising link hints as
an object; for example:

~~~
{
  "_links": {
    "self": {
      "href": "/orders/523",
       "hints": {
        "allow": ["GET", "POST"],
        "accept-post": {
          "application/example+json":
            {}
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
~~~

In other link formats, this requires a mapping from the canonical JSON data
model. One such mapping for the Link HTTP header is described in
{{link_header}}.

The information in a link hint SHOULD NOT be considered valid for longer than
the freshness lifetime ({{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p6-cache}}) of the representation
that the link occurred within, and in some cases, it might be valid for a
considerably shorter period.

Likewise, the information in a link hint is specific to the link it is attached
to. This means that if a representation is specific to a particular user, the
hints on links in that representation are also specific to that user.


Pre-Defined HTTP Link Hints {#hints}
===========================

allow
-----

* Hint Name: allow
* Description: Hints the HTTP methods that can be used to interact with the
  target resource; equivalent to the Allow HTTP response header.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing HTTP methods.

formats
-------

* Hint Name: formats
* Description: Hints the representation type(s) that the target resource can
  produce and consume, using the GET and PUT (if allowed) methods respectively.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an object, whose keys are media types, and values are objects.

The object MAY have a "links" member, whose value is an object representing
links (in the sense of {{RFC5988}}) whose context is any document that uses
that format. Generally, this will be schema or profile ({{RFC6906}})
information. The "links" member has the same format as the "links" hint.

Furthermore, the object MAY have a "deprecated" member, whose value is either
true or false, indicating whether support for the format might be removed in
the near future.

All other members of the object are under control of the corresponding media
type's definition.

links
-----

* Hint Name: links
* Description: Hints at links whose context is the target resource.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

The "links" hint contains links (in the sense of {{RFC5988}}) whose context is
the hinted target resource, which are stable for the lifetime of the hint.

Content MUST be an object, whose member names are link relations ({{RFC5988}})
and values are objects that MUST have an "href" member whose value is a
URI-reference ({{RFC3986}}, using the original link as the base for resolution)
for the link hint's target resource, and MAY itself contain link hints,
serialised as the value for a "hints" member.

For example:

~~~
"links": {
  "edit-form": {
    "href": "./edit",
    "hints": {
      formats: {
        "application/json": {}
      }
    }
  }
}
~~~

accept-post
-----------

* Hint Name: accept-post
* Description: Hints the POST request format(s) that the target resource can
  consume.
* Content Model: object
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an object, with the same constraints as for "formats".

When this hint is present, "POST" SHOULD be listed in the "allow" hint.

accept-patch
------------

* Hint Name: accept-patch
* Description: Hints the PATCH {{RFC5789}} request format(s) that the target
  resource can consume; equivalent to the Accept-Patch HTTP response header.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing media types. Note that there is
no opportunity to communicate format-specific hints for PATCH formats.

When this hint is present, "PATCH" SHOULD be listed in the "allow" hint.

accept-ranges
-------------

* Hint Name: accept-ranges
* Description: Hints the range-specifier(s) available for the target resource;
  equivalent to the Accept-Ranges HTTP response header
  {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p5-range}}.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, containing HTTP range-specifiers.

accept-prefer
-------------

* Hint Name: accept-prefer
* Description: Hints the preference(s) {{I-D.snell-http-prefer}} that the
  target resource understands (and might act upon) in requests.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, contain preferences. Note that, by its
nature, a preference can be ignored by the server.

precondition-req
----------------

* Hint Name: precondition-req
* Description: Hints that the target resource requires state-changing requests
  (e.g., PUT, PATCH) to include a precondition, as per
  {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p4-conditional}}, to avoid conflicts due to concurrent
  updates.
* Content Model: array (of strings)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of strings, with possible values "etag" and
"last-modified" indicating type of precondition expected.

See also the 428 Precondition Required status code ({{RFC6585}}).

auth-schemes
------------

* Hint Name: auth-schemes
* Description: Hints that the target resource requires authentication using the
  HTTP Authentication Framework {{I-D.ietf-httpbis-p7-auth}}.
* Content Model: array (of objects)
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be an array of objects, each with a "scheme" member containing
a string that corresponds to a HTTP authentication scheme, and optionally a
"realms" member containing an array of zero to many strings that identify
protection spaces that the resource is a member of.

For example:

~~~
  {
    "auth-req": [
      {
        "scheme": "Basic",
        "realms": ["private"]
      }
    ]
  }
~~~

status
------

* Hint Name: status
* Description: Hints the status of the target resource.
* Content Model: string
* Specification: [this document]

Content MUST be a string; possible values are:

* "deprecated" - indicates that use of the resource is not recommended, but it
  is still available.
* "gone" - indicates that the resource is no longer available; i.e., it will
  return a 410 Gone HTTP status code if accessed.



Security Considerations
=======================

Clients need to exercise care when using hints. For example, a naive client
might send credentials to a server that uses the auth-req hint, without
checking to see if those credentials are appropriate for that server.


IANA Considerations
===================

HTTP Link Hint Registry {#hint_registry}
-----------------------

This specification defines the HTTP Link Hint Registry. See {{link_hints}}
for a general description of the function of link hints.

Link hints are generic; that is, they are potentially applicable to any HTTP
resource, not specific to one application of HTTP, nor to one particular
format. Generally, they ought to be information that would otherwise be
discoverable by interacting with the resource.

Hint names MUST be composed of the lowercase letters (a-z), digits (0-9),
underscores ("_") and hyphens ("-"), and MUST begin with a lowercase letter.

Hint content MUST be described in terms of JSON values ({{RFC4627}}, Section
2.1).

Hint semantics SHOULD be described in terms of the framework defined in
{{RFC5988}}.

New hints are registered using the Expert Review process described in
{{RFC5226}} to enforce the criteria above. Requests for registration of new
resource hints are to use the following template:

* Hint Name: [hint name]
* Description: [a short description of the hint's semantics]
* Content Model: [valid JSON value types; see RFC627 Section 2.1]
* Specification: [reference to specification document]

Initial registrations are enumerated in {{hints}}. The "rel", "rev",
"hreflang", "media", "title", and "type" hint names are reserved, so as to
avoid potential clashes with link serialisations.


--- back

Representing Link Hints in Link Headers {#link_header}
=======================================

A link hint can be represented in a Link header ({{RFC5988}}, Section 5) as a
link-extension.

When doing so, the JSON of the hint's content SHOULD be normalised to reduce
extraneous spaces (%x20), and MUST NOT contain horizontal tabs (%x09), line
feeds (%x0A) or carriage returns (%x0D). When they are part of a string value,
these characters MUST be escaped as described in {{RFC4627}} Section 2.5;
otherwise, they MUST be discarded.

Furthermore, if the content is an array or an object, the surrounding
delimiters MUST be removed before serialisation. In other words, the outermost
object or array is represented without the braces ("{}") or brackets ("[]")
respectively, but this does not apply to inner objects or arrays.


For example, the two JSON values below are those of the fictitious "example" and "exmaple1" hints, respectively:

~~~
"The Example Value"
1.2
~~~

In a Link header, they would be serialised as:

~~~
Link: </>; rel="sample"; example="The Example Value";
      example1=1.2
~~~

A more complex, single value for "example":

~~~
[
  "foo",
  -1.23,
  true,
  ["charlie", "bennet"],
  {"cat": "thor"},
  false
]
~~~

would be serialised as:

~~~
Link: </>; rel="sample"; example="\"foo\", -1.23, true,
      [\"charlie\", \"bennet\"], {"cat": \"thor\"}, false"
~~~



Acknowledgements
================

Thanks to Jan Algermissen, Mike Amundsen, Bill Burke, Graham Klyne, Leif
Hedstrom, Jeni Tennison, Erik Wilde and Jorge Williams for their suggestions
and feedback.

Open Issues
===========

The following is a list of placeholders for open issues.

* Resource Hints
  * indicate a POST to 201 Created pattern
  * indicate an "action" POST
  * outbound links
  * forms?
* Representation Hints
  * format profiles
  * schema?
  * deprecation
